The Eric Garner Case: Grand Jury Will Weigh Police Killing

The Brooklyn district attorney is planning to impanel a grand jury to consider charges in the Nov. 20 shooting death of an unarmed black man at the hands of a New York City police officer.

The probe into the death of Akai Gurley announced Friday by District Attorney Ken Thompson comes amid protests across the country after two grand juries declined to indict officers involved in the deaths of two other unarmed black men: Eric Garner on Staten Island and Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo. Civil-rights leaders, public officials and protesters have demanded prosecutions of the officers involved in the civilian deaths in those cases.

Probationary Officer Peter Liang's gun fired accidentally in the darkened staircase of a public housing complex in the East New York neighborhood of Brooklyn, police officials have said, striking the 28-year-old Mr. Gurley in the chest.

"I'm going to do it because it is important to get to the bottom of what happened to Mr. Gurley, who was an innocent unarmed man who lost his life," Mr. Thompson said Friday.

Kenneth Montgomery, an attorney advising Mr. Gurley's mother and stepfather, said he trusted that the Brooklyn district attorney's office would be aggressive and fair in its presentation of the case.

Officer Liang, 27 years old and with fewer than 18 months on the job, has been placed on modified desk duty without his badge and gun, pending the outcome of investigations, according to police officials. The New York Police Department's Internal Affairs Bureau is also conducting a probe.

Calls to Officer Liang's home weren't answered Friday afternoon.

Officer Liang's attorney, Stephen Worth, declined to comment on whether his client would testify before the grand jury. of Mr. Thompson's decision, he said: "I hope he is taking his time and being deliberate in his presentation."

A private viewing for Mr. Gurley was held Friday night at Brown Memorial Baptist Church in Brooklyn; a funeral service was scheduled for Saturday morning.

The Rev. Al Sharpton was slated to deliver the eulogy at the Friday night services for Mr. Gurley in Brooklyn -- his National Action Network had billed it as a public funeral open to the press -- but backed out hours before the event, citing an alteration in the plans for the services because of Mr. Gurley's family.

Eugene O'Donnell, a former New York City prosecutor and professor at the John Jay School of Criminal Justice, said any charges in the case would likely hinge on whether a grand jury found the officer's explanation that the shooting as an accident was credible.

"The grand jury is likely to look at the whole event, beginning and after, how quickly they called for first aid," Mr. O'Donnell said.

Mr. Thompson said while he understood the anger surrounding the Garner decision, he didn't believe the case needed a special prosecutor in the Brooklyn case. There is no timetable for consideration of any charges by the Brooklyn grand jury.
