U.S. News: No Severance for Ferguson Officer --- Darren Wilson Decided to Resign After Threat Made Against Police Colleagues, His Attorney Says

FERGUSON, Mo. -- The police officer who killed an unarmed black 18-year-old this summer and resigned from the force Saturday left his job voluntarily and won't receive severance or benefits, officials said Sunday.

The Aug. 9 shooting of Michael Brown sparked months of demonstrations across the country as well as recent protests and riots in this St. Louis suburb, fueling a national debate about race and police tactics.

Officer Darren Wilson's resignation came after violent clashes with police, widespread looting and arson erupted following a local grand jury's Nov. 24 decision not to indict the white officer on criminal changes.

Several witnesses had testified that Mr. Brown's actions appeared to be threatening to Mr. Wilson, who joined the force in 2011.

After numerous arrests following damage to more than a dozen businesses, protests have been relatively calm in the last day or so, with two people charged Saturday night and early Sunday morning, police said.

In a television interview Sunday, Mr. Wilson's attorney said the officer had been informed of a threat against his colleagues on the 53-member force if he remained in his job.

"I have been told that my continued employment may put the residents and police officers of the City of Ferguson at risk, which is a circumstance that I cannot allow," Mr. Wilson wrote in his resignation letter.

"We have now severed ties with Officer Darren Wilson," Ferguson Mayor James Knowles said Sunday.

The mayor said the city was making efforts to recruit more minority officers and to offer police incentives to live in Ferguson, a blue-collar suburb that has seen months of tensions between the city's black-majority population of 21,000 and its mostly white police force.

Mr. Wilson, 28 years old, said that "for obvious reasons," he wanted to wait until the grand jury reached its decision before leaving the police department.

The shooting set off nationwide debate about whether Mr. Wilson had acted too aggressively against Mr. Brown. The officer said he and the teen struggled during a routine stop that turned violent.

In grand jury testimony, Mr. Wilson said he acted to protect himself from Mr. Brown, who he said attacked him and tried to take his gun. "He believed that Mr. Brown intended to kill him," Mr. Wilson's attorney Neil Bruntrager said Sunday on Fox.

Some witnesses told the grand jury that Mr. Brown had his arms raised before he was fatally shot, though others disputed that account.

The officer had "other reasonable means" to stop Mr. Brown besides using lethal force, Daryl Parks , a Brown family attorney, said in a Fox interview Sunday.

Several players with the St. Louis Rams National Football League team entered their home stadium Sunday with their arms raised in what may have been a sign used by protesters mimicking Mr. Brown's alleged actions. An email seeking comment from the Rams wasn't immediately answered.

Sunday afternoon, St. Louis Metropolitan Police reported six arrests related to protesters gathering in the city's downtown not far from the stadium.

Civil-rights leader the Rev. Al Sharpton told a packed St. Louis church Sunday that "men and women of faith need to stand at this hour" and continue to protest, to push for federal charges against the officer and other systemic changes involving police accountability. "I believe justice will come," he said.

Nearly 100 locations in and around Ferguson, from utility substations to sports stadiums, were under watch last weekend by the Missouri National Guard and State Highway Patrol, Gov. Jay Nixon wrote in a letter to lawmakers.

Mr. Wilson's departure received little reaction from residents interviewed Sunday who had gathered under a white tent, part of a largely AfricanAmerican congregation that lost its church to arson last week. "He didn't get indicted so I'm not sure it's going to make a difference," said Hughie Naylor, a 38-year-old unemployed resident of the nearby suburb of Country Club Hills. Mr. Naylor nonetheless predicted it was unlikely Ferguson would see riots again because the shock of the grand-jury decision was wearing off.

Mr. Wilson said in his letter that he hoped his departure would help calm his community.

The Justice Department has said it continues to look into the circumstances surrounding Mr. Brown's death and the practices of the city's police department. In a recent television interview, Mr. Wilson maintained his innocence, saying he knows he did his job correctly.
