Bands, Balloons and, This Thanksgiving, Protesters

The usual helium-filled characters, like Snoopy and the pudgy Pillsbury Doughboy, were out in force at the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade on Thursday. But this year, the parade had an edge: Pockets of protesters marched intermittently along the route, seeking to call attention to a grand jury's decision on Monday not to indict the police officer who shot and killed Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., in August.

By midafternoon, as the balloons were deflated on Seventh Avenue, seven demonstrators had been arrested, some zip-tied by police officers as they tried to swarm a barricade into the parade route.

But the marching bands and bobbling balloons continued apace. While some people on social media were calling for an effort to halt the parade in response to the grand jury's action, an issue that has set off demonstrations and marches across the country, for the most part the event was festive. Raw weather that seemed unable to decide whether to rain or snow seemed the most pervasive dampener, chilling the teenage "Spirit of America" dancers who rubbed their arms against the cold even as they boogied down Avenue of the Americas.

The wintry mix did not bother the four members of the Montfort family, visitors from Miami, as they bundled out of the Affinia Manhattan hotel in Midtown, eager to see their favorite float, Greg Heffley from "Diary of a Wimpy Kid."

"We wanted to see that weather; we came for that," Stephane Montfort, 42, said. "In Miami, you don't have this feeling of Christmas. You only see it in Home Depot."

Tiffany White, 22, had braved the weather, traveling from East Flatbush, Brooklyn, to see the parade with eight members of her extended family -- nine, she corrected, pointing to Harry the Yorkshire terrier, whose head was poking out of a pocketbook. Afterward, the whole family was going ice skating at Rockefeller Center. Harry, too. "We wanted him to enjoy the festivities," Ms. White said.

As the snow came down on the corner of Avenue of the Americas and 34th Street, cheerleaders threw padded mats onto the pavement, setting up formations of burly men who threw ponytailed girls into the air in unison. Behind them, the band Kiss tootled down the street on a black float, in its trademark makeup.

At points, the musician Gene Simmons, known for his extraordinarily long tongue and tendency to waggle it, did so at the crowd. So too did Kalu Zuniga, 3, sitting atop his father's shoulders as the float trudged by. But he was catching snowflakes, Kalu said.

As Papa Smurf deflated at the parade's terminus on Seventh Avenue and spectators straggled home, about two dozen protesters threaded through the crowd, followed by six police officers on motorcycles. They carried signs in honor of Michael Brown and chanted his name.

The parade was over but the protesters did not seem ready to stop, even if it meant missing Thanksgiving dinner, said a protester who gave his name as Nkozi Weusi Shakur, 30. "Mike Brown's not at Thanksgiving dinner," he said. 
