Officer Defused Eruptions as Crowds Grew Volatile

FERGUSON, Mo. -- Late Wednesday, two nights after rioting left blocks of this suburban city in smoldering ruin, a small but angry crowd assembled at the police station on South Florissant Road.

On previous nights, protesters hurled D batteries, bottles of urine and rocks at the police officers and National Guard troops who stood stern-faced behind steel barricades and concrete barriers.

But around 11 p.m. on Wednesday, an unlikely scene unfolded off to the side.

A teenage protester whose face had been hidden behind a ski mask lowered his headgear, approached a police commander and gave him a hug.

"Good to see you, man," the commander, Lt. Jerry Lohr of the St. Louis County Police, said to the teenager, Joshua Williams. "How've you been? How's your mom doing? I saw her out here earlier."

Lieutenant Lohr, 41, had a scratch on his left eyelid from a scuffle that broke out during an arrest the previous night and a wad of chewing tobacco in his mouth. He wore no riot gear -- just a standard-issue brown uniform -- and held not a baton in his hand but his knit cap.

"We going to have a good night?" he asked Mr. Williams.

"Yeah," Mr. Williams, 19, said.

Wednesday was indeed a calm night for Ferguson, compared with the looting and arson Monday that came after the announcement that a grand jury had declined to indict the white police officer who fatally shot Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, in August.

Before, during and after that first night of violence, few law enforcement officials have done more on the ground to ease the volatility of protesters than Lieutenant Lohr, who is white. And few of his white colleagues have been able to connect with the largely black crowds better than he has.

After embracing the lieutenant, Mr. Williams was back at the barricades, his mask again covering his face. "We were having a conversation one day out here, and he seemed like a pretty decent guy, so I grew to like him," said Mr. Williams, who is black and lives in Ferguson. "He's the only one I feel comfortable being around. The rest of them -- no, I don't."

Lieutenant Lohr, a Nashville-born former Texan and father of three with an Army-style buzz cut, is one of the commanders overseeing security at the Ferguson police station. He never wears riot gear, even when he wades into a group of protesters to answer questions, resolve disputes or listen to a stream of insults. Protesters at the gates ask for him by name, so they can make complaints, for example, about the use of tear gas or of officers being too aggressive in arresting a woman.

One night, he approached a woman who led protesters onto the street to block traffic. She looked at her watch.

"It's 11:12," she told him. "Give me to 11:15 with these folks out here."

Lieutenant Lohr agreed, set a timer on his wristwatch and helped direct traffic around them.

Black residents here have long said that their outrage after Mr. Brown's killing stemmed from the nearly all-white Ferguson police force's poor community relations and what they said was its abusive and racially targeted practices. Lieutenant Lohr, to many of the protesters, is evidence that law enforcement officials have improved community relations at a divisive time.

"Allowing people to talk on a one-on-one level does a lot as far as building bridges," Lieutenant Lohr said. "They may not agree with what I'm doing, but now they at least know my name and my face. I'm human again. They realize that I'm a person. I'm not just a uniform."

"We have to bridge this gap," he continued. "It's not going to happen overnight. This is going to be a long-term relationship, a long-term commitment, that both sides are going to have to make."

On Monday, Lieutenant Lohr helped stop, or at least delay, outbreaks of rioting.

Shortly before 8:30 p.m., as hundreds of demonstrators learned the officer who fatally shot Mr. Brown was not being charged -- and Mr. Brown's stepfather stomped on the hood of a car, urging the protesters to action -- those near the front of the barricades surged forward and objects flew over officers' heads.

But after a man knocked the fence over, Lieutenant Lohr rushed in, standing between the riot-ready officers and demonstrators.

"When I got out there, I said, 'Please don't push the barricade down -- this isn't going to help anything,' " the lieutenant recalled. "We both picked it up and put it back up."

The situation eased. Then it reignited down South Florissant, as protesters vandalized a parked police cruiser and hurled rocks.

The next night, Tuesday, before the scuffle that led to the scratch on his eyelid, Lieutenant Lohr crossed South Florissant -- the only officer to do so -- to speak with demonstrators. There was a brief discussion about the use of the street. The lieutenant told them they could have two of the four lanes.

He was polite to the protesters. His strongest words were reserved for the reporters who stuck microphones at his face and crowded behind him. A protester, Alene Williams, told him she was offended by the presence of the military.

"You have to protect these buildings," she said. "You have to protect the citizens. But you also have to protect the people."

"I know," he said, "and I'm trying to do that."

The lieutenant's cellphone rang. "Let me take this call," he told her. "Thank you."

As he walked away, Ms. Williams said of Lieutenant Lohr, "He all right. I give him a little credit, but he ain't going to get too much, because he's still the police." 
