The Scary, the Sad, and the Just Plain Bizarre

A psychiatrist once told me that people tend to focus more on bad news because human beings are genetically wired to identify dangers they should thereafter avoid. If so, people following the rioting in the small Missouri town of Ferguson most likely came away sensing that the danger to avoid was not the rioters, angered by the police killing of an unarmed 18-year-old AfricanAmerican, but the police confronting the demonstrators, decked out like Marines preparing to retake Falluja.

Looking over the other news that attracted the most attention over the past week suggests that identifying dangers is not all that draws people to certain events.

There is also the bizarre. The slow journey of over 250 white-painted Russian trucks, driven toward Ukraine by men identically dressed in khaki shorts, T-shirts and caps, to deliver what was described as humanitarian assistance was more B-movie than reality. The strangeness of the convoy was heightened when Ukraine, caught by surprise and not entirely sure what to do about the Russian move, decided to send its own humanitarian convoy toward the embattled eastern provinces.

Conversely, entertainment became sad reality in the suicide of Robin Williams. The death of the brilliant comedian drew innumerable tributes, commentaries and analyses, recalling everything from his greatest lines to his love of bicycles and his history of depression.

Death of a Comedian

The complexity and confusion of our times was a major source of the instant quips that filled the extraordinarily rapid-fire monologues of Robin Williams. "The world is changing now, it's beyond arithmetic," he said in a Playboy interview in 1992. "It's like into some Malthusian nightmare. In two seconds, governments are gone. Oops. It's Lithuania -- no, it's Yugoslavia -- no, it's two countries. It's changing that quick. And there's so much to play off." After he hanged himself at his home on Monday, we learned of his bouts with depression, alcohol and drugs, and of his incipient Parkinson's. If anything, the revelations of his suffering made Mr. Williams seem all the more endearing, and his genius all the more remarkable. When his routines and movies are replayed -- and they will be, again and again -- we will be reminded that the ability to laugh at the foibles of the world, and at oneself, is not a simple burden. But it is a gift, which he shared with all.

The Mystery of the Convoy

Conflicts are by nature complex and hard to follow, but the fog over the Russia-Ukraine spat has been unusually thick. One reason is that a major weapon deployed by Russia, and to a lesser degree by Ukraine, has been propaganda and outright lies. Russia, for example, has denied that the secessionist rebels in Donetsk and Luhansk are even supported by Russia, though there is no lack of evidence that they are not only armed and backed by Russia, but that many of them are Russian citizens.

The long line of white trucks that as of Friday was parked near the Ukraine border -- evidently repainted army trucks, driven by identically dressed "volunteers" who declined to identify who sent them and purportedly filled with humanitarian supplies -- blends perfectly into this fog.

According to the Russians, the 262 trucks are a good-will gesture, bringing food and supplies to residents of war-ravaged eastern Ukraine. Reporters for whom one truck was opened saw sacks filled with buckwheat and boxes filled with sleeping bags. The reporters said the inside of the truck was still painted green.

According to Kiev, the trucks are either a cynical propaganda gimmick or a Trojan convoy, bringing unknown reinforcement to the secessionist forces. In either case, Kiev has said it will allow the trucks in only if they are first checked out by Ukrainian inspectors and then driven in under Red Cross supervision.

In parallel with the convoy, Western journalists reported on Thursday that they saw several Russian armored personnel carriers crossing into Ukraine. NATO confirmed that it had observed a Russian "incursion," and the Ukrainian president, Petro O. Poroshenko, claimed on his website that most of the Russian vehicles had been destroyed. Mr. Poroshenko offered no proof.

Moscow, for its part, denied that any of its vehicles, civil or military, had cross into Ukraine.

The Militarized Police

The shooting on Feb. 9 of an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, by a white policeman reportedly investigating a holdup at a convenience store was a tragically familiar reflection of the systemic discrimination that persists against black and Hispanic youths and men across America. The details of the shooting are under investigation, and at week's end the Ferguson police finally made public the name of the police officer who shot Mr. Brown.

The less familiar part of the story was the militarized police force that appeared in the streets of Ferguson, a town of only 21,200, to confront angry protesters. The millions of dollars of military equipment on display along Ferguson's West Florissant Avenue -- including a $360,000 BearCat armored truck, helicopters and most of the body armor worn by police officers -- was clearly not designed for crowd control.

On the contrary, the police, with their assault rifles, combat helmets and armored vehicles, only further angered the crowds. It was only when Gov. Jay Nixon finally sent an officer of the state's highway patrol to take charge, and Capt. Ronald S. Johnson, an AfricanAmerican native of Ferguson, sent the heavy armaments away and started talking to the protesters, that the passions ebbed.

The images of militarized police taking aim at people they are sworn to protect has put a spotlight on the programs that have enabled police departments across the United States -- including many small ones, like Ferguson's 53-strong force -- to acquire combat gear. Much of it has come from Department of Homeland Security grants dispensed since the "war on terror" was declared in the wake of 9/11. Since 2003, the St. Louis Area Regional Response System of the Department of Homeland Security has spent $9.4 million on equipment for St. Louis County, which includes Ferguson, according to the executive director, Nick Gragnani.

Law enforcement agencies across the United States have also received military gear from the Pentagon under the 1033 program, enacted in 1997 to distribute surplus military gear.

There are few restrictions on the use of any of the gear, and until now there has been little debate about its distribution.

But apart from the question of whether fighting terrorism requires arming local cops to the teeth, Ferguson demonstrated the inherent danger of deploying aggressive and highly militarized police in a confrontation where the goal, as Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said, was "to rebuild trust between law enforcement and the local community." 
