In Ferguson and beyond, goodness is no protection against racism

When black men, boys and teenagers like Michael Brown are killed by the police, their survivors and supporters are often left to put together a grim accounting table of what their deaths cost, be it in lost professional or educational potential or in the love and affection their families and friends are now denied.

No one should not have to perform these calculations, to make an affirmative case for the humanity of the dead against the presumption that if an officer of the law fatally shoots or chokes you, you must have done something to deserve it. Doing the individual math may even result in a more unbalanced ledger. As Janee Woods put it, "The Good Kid narrative might provoke some sympathy but what it really does is support the lie that as a rule black people, black men in particular, have a norm of violence or criminal behavior. The Good Kid narrative says that this kid didn't deserve to die because his goodness was the exception to the rule. This is wrong."

But because so many are so often forced to do so, this equation persists as a desperate attempt to get others to reach the conclusion that was the slogan of so many protesters who gathered across the country last night to express their frustration that a grand jury had failed to indict Officer Darren Wilson for the shooting death of Brown: Black lives matter. Those signs made me think of Norman Jewison's 1967 movie "In The Heat of the Night," a murder mystery that is really about the moral mathematics that determine who is human and worthy of respect and about the limited use of those calculations.

"In the Heat of the Night" is the story of a Northern homicide detective, Virgil Tibbs (Sidney Poitier), who, while waiting for a train connection in Sparta, Mississippi, is picked up for questioning in the murder of a local industrialist, Philip Colbert. He is deemed suspicious because Patrolman Sam Wood (Warren Oates) identifies him as an outsider to the town and because Police Chief Bill Gillespie (Rod Steiger) cannot imagine why he would have so much money on him.

Rather than being shot or lingering in detention, Tibbs has the good fortune to convince Gillespie and Wood to verify his identity with his police chief back in Philadelphia. And in reluctantly agreeing to help Chief Gillespie solve Colbert's murder, Tibbs is not only proving his innocence. He is also making a very deliberate demonstration of what it would cost Gillespie and his colleagues to treat Tibbs as a criminal and a thug rather than as a professional colleague.

Without Tibbs's knowledge of forensic science, Gillespie might have settled on the first suspect he arrested as the culprit. Lacking Tibbs's confidence, Gillespie might never have investigated Eric Endicott (Larry Gates), a planter with economic reasons to want Colbert dead and his factory project scrapped. If Tibbs were not committed and smart enough to clear Sam Wood of the killing, and patient enough to do so even though Wood initially fingered Tibbs as a suspect, Gillespie might have arrested one of his own men for murder. And finally, without Tibbs's outsider perspective, Gillespie might not have been able to dig deep enough into the social fabric of his own town to discover that racist diner clerk Ralph Henshaw (Anthony James) had actually killed Colbert in the process of trying to get money to pay for his girlfriend's abortion.

Part of what is striking and relevant about the conclusion to "In The Heat of the Night" is the way the movie emphasizes who benefits from all of Tibbs's hard work. Gillespie gets his murder solved for him and solved in a way that guarantees that Colbert's widow will not suspend plans to build a large factory in town. And Gillespie also gets the moral satisfaction of feeling that he has grown from his association with Tibbs: He is the kind of man who can have a black colleague and can face down a racist mob.

But Tibbs's accomplishments do not make it any safer for him in Sparta. In fact, his efficacy in determining Henshaw's guilt and in penetrating Sparta's secrets have made him a target - the idea that a black man would investigate a white woman's sexual past is unbearable for many Sparta residents.

Gillespie has learned to respect and value Tibbs, but that only serves to emphasize the ways in which he himself is an outsider in the town he protects, rather than reflecting some more general shift in the attitudes of Sparta residents. And nothing about Tibbs's brief sojourn in Sparta is likely to make the town safer for its black residents, who do not have the option of hopping a train out of town and returning to the comparative security of Philadelphia.

Unlike Virgil Tibbs and the rest of the living, the dead cannot speak and act in their own defense. But neither should have to, and "In the Heat of the Night" is a frustrating tally of how little they can accomplish by doing so. 
