U.S. News: Thousands Take to the Streets in Protest --- Demonstrators Nationwide Turn Out for Second Night After Grand Juries Decline to Charge Police in Deaths of Black Men

Protests rippled across the country Thursday, a day after a grand jury didn't charge a New York City police officer in the death of a black man who allegedly was selling untaxed cigarettes last summer.

For a second night, demonstrators gathered in New York, Washington, D.C., and beyond chanting variations of: "Shut the whole system down!" "No justice, no peace" and "I can't breathe."

The crowd swelled to thousands in New York City. In Foley Square, protesters spilled into the surrounding lower Manhattan neighborhood and eventually across the Brooklyn Bridge, to the West Side Highway and Times Square.

Dozens of protesters were arrested, New York City police said.

"We need to show solidarity whenever we can," said Oyku Tekten, a 32-year-old graduate student at the City University of New York.

The protests came in the wake of the July 17 death of 43-year-old Eric Garner after officer Daniel Pantaleo put him in an apparent chokehold on a Staten Island street. Police have said Mr. Garner was resisting arrest. The confrontation was captured on a video in which Mr. Garner, who suffered from asthma, repeatedly pleaded, "I can't breathe."

Further inflaming nationwide demonstrations was the Nov. 24 grand jury decision in Ferguson, Mo., not to indict police officer Darren Wilson in the Aug. 9 shooting death of 18-year-old Michael Brown. In both cases, the officers were white and the victims were unarmed black men.

In Washington, demonstrators gathered near the National Mall on Thursday evening, yelling, "This is what democracy looks like" and "If I can't breathe, you can't breathe."

The protests came within several hundred yards of the National Christmas-Tree lighting hosted by President Barack Obama. Demonstrators closed city intersections, lying motionless in 4 1/2-minute increments, a reference to Mr. Brown, whose body remained on a Ferguson street for 4 1/2 hours after he died.

In Boston, thousands of demonstrators and holiday revelers mixed at a tree-lighting ceremony on the city's historic common Thursday evening. Marchers drowned out singing with choruses of: "Hands up! Don't shoot!" and "Black lives matter!"

State police joined Boston officers in managing the crowd as it snaked through the city's streets to the Massachusetts Capitol. Four people were arrested, state police said.

In Baltimore, a few hundred protesters marched through downtown and to the city's Washington Monument, chanting, "No justice, no holiday."

Some spectators said they didn't think this was the appropriate time or place for such a demonstration. One man shouted, "Go home."

Officers on horseback and motorcycles allowed demonstrators to march north on Charles Street, a major thoroughfare, from the Inner Harbor to the monument.

In downtown Pittsburgh, about 150 protesters also blocked afternoon traffic for the symbolic 4 1/2 minutes. "The protest needs to last all week, all month. This killing of our kids has to stop," said James Thompson, a 60-year-old disabled Marine veteran.

Earlier Thursday, the Rev. Al Sharpton held a news conference in New York with other civil-rights leaders to announce what was billed as a "National March Against Police Violence" in Washington, D.C., on Dec. 13.

Mr. Sharpton said he would be joined by relatives of Mr. Garner and Mr. Brown, and the family of Akai Gurley, the 28-year-old black man accidentally shot last month by a rookie NYPD officer in the stairwell of a Brooklyn housing project. "We . . . will be demanding a redress on these cases," Mr. Sharpton said.

Thursday night in Foley Square, Shareese Thompson, a 40-year-old Brooklyn television producer, was standing in the crowd, quietly crying. Ms. Thompson, who is black, said she grew up hearing stories about the segregated South from her mother, who is from Virginia.

"My mom was one of the first students integrated in Virginia," Ms. Thompson said. "I just never thought we'd still be here, seeing the same things we saw in history books."
