City News: Protests Aim At a Retailer On a Big Day --- Grand-Jury Reaction Here Hits Macy's

Demonstrators massed inside and outside Macy's on Herald Square on Black Friday in a bid to flex economic power following a Missouri grand jury's decision not to indict a police officer in the fatal shooting of a black teenager.

The demonstrators alternately shouted "Black lives matter, all lives matter" and "Hands up, don't shop!" as shoppers streamed inside for holiday bargains.

Police said they made several arrests during the protest, which shifted much of the afternoon amid different sites in Midtown.

Protesters in New York City and other cities have staged almost daily demonstrations since a grand jury earlier this week declined to indict Darren Wilson, a white Ferguson, Mo., police officer who last summer shot and killed a black teenager, Michael Brown.

In Manhattan, a procession of demonstrators marched into Macy's midafternoon. Amid apparently unfazed throngs of shoppers, they held signs protesting both capitalism and the circumstances in Ferguson.

"Black Friday is a big day a lot of companies depend on and we're saying, 'Hey, I don't want to participate in a broken system,'" said Adrienne Schroeder, 37 years old, who was among the demonstrators Friday at Herald Square.

A Macy's spokesman said the store's business wasn't interrupted by the protest.

Bundled up against temperatures hovering around freezing, the demonstrators blocked traffic intermittently over several hours as they moved about Midtown. They marched to the Fifth Avenue side of the New York Public Library, to Times Square and to Herald Square. Some went on to Union Square.

Police were generally hands-off as the group moved north on Broadway. The group pulled up at Duffy Square near West 46th Street and Broadway to hear speeches. There, they were flanked by long lines of people waiting to buy tickets at the TKTS Booth, but the two groups interacted little.

Police stood nearby, not allowing protesters to ascend the red steps of the TKTS booth.

Several participants said the intent of the demonstration was to make a link between the economic and justice systems, as well as to protest the decision by the grand jury in Missouri.

"People are asking, what are the next steps?" said Mari Morales-Williams, age 28, who held aloft a sign and was joined by her parents. She is from the Bronx but living now in Philadelphia. "All of the systems are complicit. We have to opt out."

By around 5:30 p.m. the group had largely dispersed, both from the Macy's flagship store and the square outside. But they had enlisted at least one shopper, Nicole Smith, to join their demonstration.

"I came to shop," said Ms. Smith, a 23 year-old college student in Pennsylvania, "but this cause seemed so much greater."
