The Ferguson Decision

One measure -- perhaps the measure -- of a civilized society is the respect it shows for the rule of law. The decision by a grand jury not to indict Ferguson, Missouri police officer Darren Wilson for shooting unarmed black teenager Michael Brown is such a test for America.

The extensive presentation on Monday night by St. Louis County prosecutor Robert McCulloch laying out the evidence appeared to be thorough. A jury of a dozen average citizens, chosen long before this case came before them and including three black Americans, looked at 70 hours of testimony, heard 60 witnesses and deliberated for two days. The public statements of some witnesses proved to be false upon examination of the physical evidence, Mr. McCulloch said, including the claims broadcast on TV that Brown was shot in the back. Brown resembled a suspect identified in a local theft and there was evidence that he reached into Mr. Wilson's car to punch him.

The jurors were presented with five potential criminal counts, including involuntary manslaughter, and rejected each one. The evidence was released to the public after Mr. McCulloch's press conference, so others will be able to sift through the file and make their own judgment. The process and the transparency would seem, at least at this early remove, to be a credit to local officials.

The failure to indict will disappoint, and even infuriate, many who believe Michael Brown is like too many other young black men who have been killed by police. The Brown family expressed its profound disappointment but to their credit called for calm and for channeling any anger into constructive action so there are fewer such episodes.

President Obama took to the White House press room and offered his own counsel that any protest be peaceful, and he quoted the statement by Brown's father that "hurting others or destroying property is not the answer." In one of those surreal moments of this media age, Mr. Obama made those remarks while the cable networks showed scenes of protests, smoke in the streets, and riot police in Ferguson.

The President spoke well about the progress America has made on race relations, while also pointing to the legacy of mistrust that often remains between police and "communities of color." It was one of his better moments, and it ought to lead to dialogue and not destruction.
