Ferguson Beefs Up Response --- Governor Triples National Guard Presence After Widespread Violence, Looting

FERGUSON, Mo. -- Gov. Jay Nixon said Tuesday he would triple the National Guard presence in the St. Louis region in the wake of widespread violence following a grand-jury decision not to indict a police officer in the shooting death of an unarmed teenager this summer.

Officials braced for further unrest after overnight riots left dozens of businesses burned in the most violent night here since Officer Darren Wilson, who is white, shot and killed 18-year-old Michael Brown, who was black, in August. The governor said about 2,200 National Guardsmen would be in the region, up from about 700 Monday, and their role would be expanded to protecting businesses and homes.

"Lives and property must be protected. This community deserves to have peace. We will provide safety and security to this region," Mr. Nixon said.

Peaceful demonstrations sprung up Tuesday night in cities around the country, including New York, Atlanta and Oakland, Calif., with protesters blocking traffic. In New York, hundreds of protesters marched from Union Square to the FDR Drive, shutting down traffic on one of Manhattan's busiest arteries.

Before the grand-jury announcement Monday night, the governor had said the National Guard would be used largely in a support role protecting facilities such as firehouses and utility substations. That approach drew criticism from some state and local officials, including Ferguson Mayor James Knowles, who on Tuesday called the decision "deeply concerning."

Attorneys for Mr. Brown's family lashed out Tuesday at the local prosecutor and the legal process that led to the grand-jury decision. They described the outcome as unfair after reviewing reams of documents released late Monday.

St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch has said the 12-member panel carefully went through extensive testimony and evidence over a three-month period and concluded there wasn't probable cause to charge Mr. Wilson.

After the announcement Monday night, protesters set police cruisers on fire, smashed windows and looted stores. By morning, more than 20 businesses were burned and more than 60 people were arrested.

Police, elected officials and protest leaders struggled Tuesday to understand how things spun out of control. State officials had spent weeks preparing for Monday's announcement, from training officers to reaching out to clergy and protest leaders, but those plans appeared to fizzle out.

"Last night was a disaster," State Highway Patrol Col. Ronald Replogle said Tuesday. "We can't have a repeat of what happened."

On Tuesday, President Barack Obama denounced the rioting as criminal acts. "Burning buildings, torching cars, destroying property, putting people at risk -- that's destructive and there's no excuse for it," he said from Chicago.

Residents and business owners spent the day cleaning up after the night of mayhem and braced for the possibility of more violence.

"We knew that if the verdict came against what people wanted it to be, this right here was going to be the outcome," said Steve Moore, who owns a restaurant close to a Little Caesars that was burned.

"It feels funny to have our town be the center of attention like this," said Chris Reimer, a St. Louis resident, who snapped a few photos of a protest near Ferguson early Tuesday.

St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar said his officers had received extra training, but were simply overwhelmed by the sheer number of people looking to cause trouble. At one point he had 600 officers on duty, but "I could have used 2,500. Easy," he said.

Mr. Wilson said Tuesday on ABC that he wouldn't have done anything differently during the incident. The officer said he paused and asked himself whether he would be right to use deadly force against Mr. Brown. He said he thought, "I have to, if I don't, he will kill me, if he gets to me."

As the sun set Tuesday, officials said they were taking steps to prevent a second night of chaos that Monday included masked looters breaking into stores and firefighters struggling to respond to burning buildings because of gunfire.

During a news conference, Mr. Nixon, a Democrat, declined to discuss specific tactics, while pledging to prevent a repeat of Monday night in part through the increased use of the guard.

Missouri House Speaker Tim Jones said Mr. Knowles called him late Monday night as the looting and arson built in Ferguson. Mr. Jones, who is a Republican, said he and others took to Twitter to get a message to the governor that the National Guard needed to step up its activity in Ferguson.

Attention was drawn to Mr. Brown's stepfather, Louis Head, after a videotape of him yelling in front of the Ferguson police department to "burn this b-- down" was widely circulated on TV and online Tuesday. Benjamin Crump, the lead attorney for Mr. Brown's family, said the remarks were "born out of desperation and frustration," but also "completely inappropriate."

"That's one of the reasons he is not speaking today," Mr. Crump said. "You don't want to give the use of raw emotion of a family that has been devastated."

The timing of the grand-jury announcement Monday drew questions. Mr. McCulloch decided to make the announcement shortly after 8 p.m. local time. His office said Tuesday it coordinated with local law enforcement and worked to ensure schools were closed and businesses could make decisions for the safety of their employees.

A former Seattle police chief who presided over the 1999 World Trade Organization protests questioned the timing, saying darkness complicates police response and gives cover to bad actors. A daytime announcement also could give time for authorities to meet with community and protest leaders.

"It raises huge questions -- what was their rationale for that?" said Norm Stamper, who was chief in Seattle from 1994 through 2000. "Were the choice mine, I would've made it early in the day."

But Paul Wertheimer, a crowd safety consultant based in Los Angeles, said that the choice of a nighttime announcement was "the lesser of two evils."

"The biggest drawback during the day is students could become victims, young people, shoppers, families," he said. "If they lost control at night, more likely than not there would just be property damage."

Pastor Carlton Lee of Flood Christian Church said he and other clergy had long been preparing to help police control the crowds once a decision was announced, but those plans broke down because all the parties "did not act on what they put in place."

Once it became clear an announcement was coming, he and others worked to contact members of the Disciples of Justice, a group advocating for peaceful protests, to head to planned locations including in Clayton and Ferguson. The group of a few hundred eventually was overwhelmed by the thousands of demonstrators, he said. "You got thousands of people out and you have roughly 100 to 200 Disciples of Justice. You can't stop everybody," Mr. Lee said.
