The Ferguson Exception

The first inclination of the political and media classes these days is to elevate every incident into a national trauma freighted with some larger theme akin to Selma, or Kent State, or Watts, or Waco. But perhaps the public disorder among the protestors and police in Ferguson, Missouri is really about -- well, the disorder in Ferguson, Missouri.

On Thursday President Obama couldn't resist weighing in (as he never can) on the violence in the town outside St. Louis, though for once his remarks were constructive. He appealed for "peace and calm on the streets" and promised "an open and transparent process to see that justice is done" following the fifth night of unrest after an unidentified police officer shot Michael Brown, a black teenager.

Responsible political leadership can help de-escalate the confrontation. The temptation on the MSNBC left is to excuse the criminals armed with bricks and firebombs and burning down convenience stores and make Ferguson a national allegory of police brutality and racism. The response on the talk-radio right is often law-and-order posturing that overlooks the troubling conversion of a suburb in the Midwest into a quasi-war zone.

The first obligation of government is to restore public safety and protect innocent citizens and property. If St. Louis County is as incapable of enforcing lawfulness as it seems to be, then Democratic Governor Jay Nixon was right on Thursday to relieve the police department of duty and send in the state highway patrol. Perhaps now the ordinary institutions of democratic governance can assemble the evidence related to both the shooting and the protests, and punish any wrongdoers.

One irony of Ferguson is that liberals have discovered an exercise of government power that they don't support. Plenary police powers are vast, and law enforcement holds a public trust to use them in proportion to the threats. The Ferguson police must prevent rioting and looting and protect their own safety, though it is reasonable to wonder when law enforcement became a paramilitary operation. The sniper rifles, black armored convoys and waves of tear gas deployed across Ferguson neighborhoods are jarring in a free society.

Maybe the next liberal discovery will be the problems inherent in public-employee contracts. Cops face real dangers on the beat, but in return they get lifetime job protections and generous retirement benefits. One result is that police forces often turn over more slowly than the demographics of the communities they serve. Ferguson shifted to a majority-black population over the last decade but 94% of the cops are white, which may have contributed to municipal mistrust.

Police contracts also build in bureaucratic privileges that would never be extended to other suspects. The Ferguson police department has refused to name the officer who killed Brown in the line of duty, citing death threats to him and his family. Supplying basic information about the circumstances and status of the investigation, if it hasn't been botched already, might help cool passions.

Police say Brown struggled for the officer's weapon, while a witness says he was shot while surrendering. Perhaps we received the wrong political training, but how is anyone supposed to draw a conclusion one way or the other without any knowledge of what happened that afternoon? Yet the race lobby is using Ferguson to portray an America that has made no racial or cultural progress since the 1960s.

There is little question that some young law-abiding black men are viewed suspiciously by some cops and the motivation may sometimes be race. It is also true that young black men -- or rather, young men -- commit crimes, often violent and whose victims are also mostly black. Instead of applying a predetermined racial template to every episode, both problems should be treated with the seriousness they deserve, which means judging each case on the merits.

Reality is contingent and fact-specific. That is why the U.S. criminal justice system respects due process and requires the government to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Attorney General Eric Holder, the FBI and the U.S. Attorney in St. Louis are conducting an independent investigation of Brown's shooting, which will be a tonic to the extent they are fair and impartial.

Ferguson may now show that racial healing and comity are possible even amid great strain. That task belongs above all to the citizens of Ferguson, and it won't be made any easier if it is exploited by national actors who are able to pack up and leave once the rioting stops.
