Autopsy Finds 6 Shots Killed Teen

Michael Brown, the unarmed 18-year-old whose shooting by a police officer set off more than a week of unrest in Ferguson, Mo., was struck by at least six bullets, including two to the head, according to a former New York City medical examiner.

The autopsy results came as a march protesting Mr. Brown's Aug. 9 death erupted in chaos Sunday night when police forced back demonstrators in a cloud of smoke and a hail of sizzling canisters.

Michael M. Baden, who conducted a second, private autopsy Sunday for the Brown family, said wounds to the head and brain were the likely cause of death.

"There were at least six entry wounds, there might have been seven, but we'll have to correlate that with what was found in the first autopsy," he said. The first autopsy was conducted by the St. Louis County Medical Examiner's office. The U.S. Justice Department announced Sunday that it ordered its own autopsy.

Dr. Baden said all of the gunshots were fired toward the front of Mr. Brown's body. The results of the autopsy were first reported by the New York Times.

The retreat by marchers after a weeklong protest campaign set off widespread vandalism and shots were fired, but it wasn't known by whom. Several storefront windows were shattered along West Florissant Avenue, a major thoroughfare in Ferguson. Police appeared to have cordoned off a large stretch of the avenue Sunday night.

Officers battled with crowds, including at a corner gas station where police came under fire after taunts by onlookers, officials said. The officers apparently responded with some type of device that triggered a loud boom. It was unclear whether there were injuries.

The police action began at about 9 p.m. shortly after hundreds of marchers reached a roadblock near a mall that held the police command center. A state highway patrol official told CNN that its command post was being overrun and officers were roughed up before responding.

The abrupt end to what appeared to be a peaceful march left some at the head of the crowd baffled and angry by the police response.

Ashley Rhodes, 24 years old, of Pine Line, said she had been halfway down West Florissant when the march fell under a hailstorm of smoke canisters. "They just ran up all on us. We had no warning," she said.

Police used a bullhorn to briefly warn marchers to retreat. But the response was much more extreme compared with other nights since the Mr. Brown's death.

The teen was struck once in the top of head, once in the forehead and four times in the arm, Dr. Baden said. Some of the shots to his arm went through the limb and entered his chest and lungs, according to Dr. Baden, who served for 25 years in the medical examiner's office in New York City and another 25 years with the New York State Police before entering private practice.

Dr. Baden said there was no residue of gunpowder on the body, indicating the shots weren't necessarily taken at close range, but that would have to be confirmed by an examination of Mr. Brown's clothing.

There were no wounds indicative of blows from some type of physical altercation, Dr. Baden said.

Mr. Brown was about 6 foot 5 and weighed 285 to 290 pounds, Dr. Baden said. "He was a large fellow," he said. "He had the build of a football player."

Earlier on Sunday, Capt. Ron Johnson of the Missouri State Highway Patrol, who is now in charge of efforts to keep protests peaceful and to prevent looting, got a standing ovation when he walked on to the stage at Greater Grace Church in Ferguson to address citizens. "I should stand up and say, 'I'm sorry,'" Capt. Johnson, who is black, told the Brown family. He said the recent violence had left his heart heavy, with "tears to my eyes and shame to my heart."

At that church and in others in Ferguson, the community sought to heal Sunday. Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon said that authorities would continue to impose a nightly curfew indefinitely. Continued rage over Mr. Brown's death sparked another early morning of clashes between police and protesters Sunday. One person was listed in critical condition with gunshot injuries.

St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch, who is investigating Mr. Brown's death, could present evidence to a grand jury as early as this week, said his executive assistant, Edward Magee.
