Decision Expected Soon in Garner Case

A police union lawyer said a Staten Island grand jury could vote as early as Wednesday on whether to bring charges in the case of Eric Garner, whose death in July from a police chokehold prompted protests and set off a citywide debate over policing tactics.

The death of Mr. Garner, who was black, inflamed tensions between the New York Police Department and minority communities. Less than three weeks later, a white police officer fatally shot an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, in Ferguson, Mo. Months of demonstrations followed, and last week riots broke in Ferguson and across the country after a grand jury declined to indict the officer.

In the Garner case, Stuart London, the lawyer representing Officer Daniel Pantaleo, said late on Tuesday that the Staten Island district attorney, Daniel M. Donovan Jr., had not told him when the grand jury would vote on an indictment, but that it would quite likely come this week, possibly as early as Wednesday.

The grand jury is meeting again at 10 a.m. on Wednesday.

Officer Pantaleo was the last to testify and is the only officer facing indictment, Mr. London said. The other officers involved in the arrest had been given immunity, he said.

The grand jury heard from Officer Pantaleo on Nov. 21, Mr. London said, and "listened attentively to what he had to say for two hours."

The Police Department has been preparing for the decision, expecting that it could amplify what has been a wave of demonstrations around the country over the fatal shooting of Mr. Brown.

Mr. Donovan impaneled a grand jury in September to hear evidence and decide whether to indict any of the officers involved in trying to arrest Mr. Garner, who was first approached for selling loose cigarettes on a sidewalk near the Staten Island Ferry.

"I will go wherever the evidence takes me, without fear or favor," Mr. Donovan said in a statement announcing the grand jury's formation.

And on Tuesday, Mr. Donovan's spokesman, Doug Auer, said he could not comment on the proceedings.

Much of the police encounter with Mr. Garner, 43, was captured on video by bystanders, and the sight of Mr. Garner struggling with the officers and then struggling to breathe helped fuel outrage over his death.

Legal experts and former prosecutors have said that despite the medical examiner's ruling the death a homicide, murder charges would be unlikely. Officers are generally given wide latitude to use force, though Police Department policy specifically prohibits chokeholds.

But a lesser homicide charge could be possible, legal experts said, including second-degree manslaughter or criminally negligent homicide.

Officer Pantaleo, who is white, wrapped an arm around Mr. Garner's neck in what the medical examiner described as a chokehold. In a video recorded by a bystander, other officers can be seen restraining Mr. Garner on the ground.

Also in the video, Mr. Garner can be heard repeatedly telling officers: "I can't breathe. I can't breathe."

Beyond the video, the grand jury has been hearing from other witnesses to the July 17 arrest along with evidence of events before and after the encounter.

The Police Department, already contending with protests over the Ferguson case, has been preparing for new demonstrations.

In August, days after heavily armed police in Ferguson clashed with protesters, the Rev. Al Sharpton led a peaceful protest through the Staten Island neighborhood where Mr. Garner died.

On Saturday, Mr. Sharpton, who has been advising Mr. Garner's family, questioned why it was taking so long for the grand jury to complete its work. 
