Churches Urge Healing, but Also Activism, After Stormy Week in Ferguson

ST. LOUIS -- At worship services around this region, clergy on Sunday called for recovery and healing after a week that began with an announcement that a grand jury would not indict a white police officer who shot an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson and that then careened through looting, fires, and tense standoffs with the police and National Guard soldiers.

Yet in many of the messages, there were also calls to continue a movement raising questions about race and police behavior that followed the shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown. That momentum and those concerns, some clergy members said, should not be allowed to fade away or be forgotten.

"I'm tired of living a certain way in our city," the Rev. Shaun Ellison Jones, the assistant pastor of Mount Zion Baptist Church-Christian Complex here, told the mostly black congregation in a simple room with tile floors. "I'm tired of some unjust laws."

"As Christians, our church encourages us to be engaged in the life of the city, the life of our community," Mr. Jones said. He urged congregants to ride a chartered bus to Jefferson City, the state capital, on the first day of the legislative session in January to make their views known.

The problems exposed by Mr. Brown's death, he added, stretch across the St. Louis region, with its patchwork of towns and police departments.

"Ferguson," Mr. Jones said, "is not just in one ZIP code."

The White House disclosed Sunday that President Obama was planning a day of meetings at the White House on Monday to respond to the unrest in Ferguson and racially tinged anger across the country. And in Ferguson, city leaders announced Sunday that the police officer who shot Mr. Brown on Aug. 9, Darren Wilson, was no longer a city employee. Having submitted his resignation letter after only three years of service, before he was fully vested, he will receive no pension, severance package or other benefits, they said.

Officer Wilson, 28, who had been on paid administrative leave and largely out of sight since the shooting, resigned after discussions with city leaders over a period of weeks. He has been a focus of protests in Ferguson, and he cited the safety of other police officers and the community among his reasons for stepping down.

In announcing Officer Wilson's departure, Mayor James Knowles III said he saw an opportunity to chart the next steps for Ferguson, which was battered last week by the looting and fires that followed the grand jury's decision, and where daily protests have continued.

"Now is the time for the city of Ferguson to begin its healing process, with the citizens of Ferguson and the Police Department," Mr. Knowles said. "We truly understand that the past few months have been very difficult for everyone involved."

While some political leaders have pressed privately for broader changes, including the departure of the police chief and perhaps even the dissolution of the city police force, Ferguson's leaders gave no sense on Sunday that such steps were being seriously considered. Chief Thomas Jackson said he had no intention of resigning, and city officials cited plans to recruit more black police officers and give larger stipends to officers who live in the city.

Chief Jackson said he had spoken with Officer Wilson recently for the first time since the shooting. At the time, the chief said, he had not heard any specific outside threats concerning Officer Wilson's return to the force. But, Chief Jackson said, "it's been a threatening environment all along."

"Everybody knows that," he added.

At Friendly Temple Missionary Baptist Church here, where Mr. Brown's funeral was held in August, the Rev. Al Sharpton spoke on Sunday to urge continued support of the cause inspired by Mr. Brown's death, invoking the struggles of the civil rights era.

"Ferguson is to this battle what there was in Selma to the voting battle," Mr. Sharpton said. "Every generation must face its battle, and none of it is easy."

Mr. Brown's mother, Lesley McSpadden, and father, Michael Brown Sr., alternately hung their heads and clapped in approval.

"Somehow, God's going to use Michael to make this nation deal with police accountability," Mr. Sharpton said. "Somehow, God's going to use this situation to heal the land."

Before the St. Louis Rams' football game here on Sunday, five Rams players appeared on the Edward Jones Dome field with arms raised in the hands-up motion that has become the symbol of this case. Outside the stadium, a group of protesters gathered, yelling chants like "No justice, no football" as the police stood watch.

Even as some school districts in the area were preparing to reopen schools on Monday for the first time since the grand jury's decision was announced last Monday, more protests were planned. They included a walkout at schools and offices at 12:01 p.m., the time of day when Mr. Brown was shot.

At the Episcopal cathedral in downtown St. Louis on Sunday morning, the Rev. Michael D. Kinman did not immediately begin a sermon, but instead led his congregation in a song from South Africa's anti-apartheid movement. "Oh, yes, I know, freedom is coming," the mostly white parishioners sang along with him.

"This past Monday night, for the second time this year, we watched parts of our beloved city burn on live television," Mr. Kinman said. "For nearly four months, we have heard powerful, young, nonviolent demonstrators cry out that black lives matter. We have heard terrible stories of the treatment of people of color at the hands of the police, which many of us have had to hold in painful tension with the relationships we have with beloved friends and family who are those police."

Like many members of the clergy, Mr. Kinman has been active in the protests. He participated in a march that prompted an upscale suburban shopping mall to close temporarily over the weekend, and he stood outside the Ferguson Police Department for two nights after the grand jury announcement.

At least for this Sunday, services of the Flood Christian Church in nearby Country Club Hills were held beneath a white tent in a parking lot of a TitleMax office. A few paces away, the faint smell of smoke still drifted from the church, which was declared a total loss after a fire on Monday night during the unrest.

"We pray now for the ones who did this to the Flood Christian Church," Carlton Lee, the church's pastor, said. "We pray first off, God, that you would forgive them. Secondarily, God, we pray that you will save them. Thirdly, we pray that you will deliver them, and, fourthly, God, we pray that you teach us how to love the hell out of them."

The authorities are investigating the fire, and police cars idled nearby during the service on an overcast afternoon. 
