Nominee's Past Offers Insight on Race Issues

WASHINGTON -- In the wake of a string of abuses by New York police officers in the 1990s, Loretta E. Lynch, the top federal prosecutor in Brooklyn, spoke forcefully about "the pain of a broken trust" that AfricanAmerican felt and said the responsibility for repairing generations of miscommunication and mistrust fell to law enforcement.

"Frankly, the onus is on law enforcement because we are the ones who have taken the oath to protect and to serve the people of this city," Ms. Lynch said in 2000. "And we are the ones who have the ability to change from within."

Ms. Lynch, a career prosecutor, is now awaiting a hearing on her nomination to be the next attorney general. Her remarks, made in two speeches during her first term as United States attorney during the Clinton administration, received little attention at the time. Today, however, the transcripts of those speeches offer insight into Ms. Lynch's thinking about an issue that will immediately occupy her attention if she is confirmed as the first black woman to serve as attorney general.

Ms. Lynch's highest-profile case involved charges against members of the New York Police Department for the 1997 attack in which a Haitian immigrant, Abner Louima, was beaten and sodomized with a broom handle. The case became a national symbol of police brutality.

She would be taking over the Justice Department just as it has begun a nationwide effort to improve police relations in minority neighborhoods in the aftermath of violent protests in Ferguson, Mo., over the shooting death of a black teenager by a white police officer. But her remarks could put her at odds with some law enforcement groups, who say the Obama administration has unfairly tarnished police officers in its comments about the shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown.

"Whatever has happened in America to cause these feelings of resentment, it's not a failure of law enforcement," Jeff Roorda, the business manager of the St. Louis Police Officers Association, told CBS on Monday. He added that the police should not be asked to change tactics to address larger societal problems. "It's decades of racial disparity, and economic disparity. It's not a problem with the police."

Ms. Lynch made the rounds on Capitol Hill on Tuesday, introducing herself to senators who will ultimately vote on her confirmation.

She is seen as likely to pick up where Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. leaves off, as a forceful, and sometimes controversial, voice on racial issues. Mr. Holder has spoken of his experience as a victim of racial profiling. His outreach in Ferguson after Mr. Brown's shooting helped calm tensions, but he rankled the police by seeming to side with protesters before the facts of the shooting were clear. He also declared a need for "wholesale change" in the Ferguson Police Department before his investigation into civil rights practices there was complete.

Ms. Lynch has served twice as the United States attorney in Brooklyn -- first at the end of the Clinton administration and again under President Obama. Her first term followed a string of high-profile police abuse cases, including the choking death of a Hispanic man in 1994, the Louima case in 1997, and the shooting deaths of a West African immigrant in 1999 and a black security guard in early 2000.

"We live in a time where people fear the police," Ms. Lynch said in 2000, at an Association of Black Women Attorneys luncheon. "But we must also understand that when people say they fear the police, as bad as that is, they are also expressing an underlying fear, that when they are confronted with the criminal element in our society, they will have no one to call upon to protect them. And that feeling of vulnerability and utter helplessness is the worst feeling that we can inflict upon fellow members of our society."

Speaking to the Black Law Students Association at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law in Manhattan in early 2001, she described the importance of allaying those fears through closer ties with law enforcement. "Building a better relationship between the police and the minority community serves us all," Ms. Lynch said. "The community desperately wants it. If people did not want things to get better, they would have burned the city down by now."

The Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association, which represents about 25,000 federal officers, endorsed Ms. Lynch's nomination last month, saying, "In light of the turbulent climate confronting law enforcement, we need a strong leader like U.S. Attorney Lynch to bring a calm, well-informed perspective."

But major groups representing local police officers, like the Fraternal Order of Police, have not expressed opinions on her nomination. As a federal prosecutor, Ms. Lynch worked closely with local police officers serving on task forces, but did not have day-to-day supervision of local departments and policies.

"I'm not concerned about anybody's opinion," James Pasco, the executive director of the Fraternal Order of Police, said Tuesday. "I'm concerned about what they will do as attorney general." He said he was still reviewing Ms. Lynch's record.

In her remarks at Cardozo in 2001, Ms. Lynch spoke of lingering racism in the criminal justice system. She told a story about a white Long Island juror who was shocked to see white defendants in a drug trial. "When I think of criminals, I don't think of white people," Ms. Lynch recalled the juror saying. "I think of black people or Hispanic people."

Ms. Lynch also spoke of mistrust between the police and members of minority groups. "The minority community has often had a conflicted relationship with law enforcement," she said. "This is primarily because so often we are its targets, and often perceived to be the only targets, both by ourselves and by others."

Ms. Lynch's remarks came at a time when New York and the nation had seen several years of rapid reduction in crime. That trend has continued, and crime is at historic lows around the country.

But Ms. Lynch cautioned against using those statistics as a benchmark for police success.

"While crime is down, there is a large part of our community that still does not feel safe," she said. "And that means that law enforcement has not done its job, no matter what the numbers say."

The Senate Judiciary Committee has not scheduled hearings on Ms. Lynch's confirmation. It is not clear how much Ferguson will factor into those hearings. Republicans are expected to use Ms. Lynch as a surrogate to criticize Mr. Obama's use of executive action to change America's immigration policies. 
