City News: Comparing Brown, Garner

An unarmed black man resists arrest, a white police officer uses force, the black man dies and a city is left waiting for answers.

These are the events that played out in Ferguson, Mo., and now continue to take shape in New York City as a grand jury deliberates in the death of a Staten Island man, Eric Garner.

Mr. Garner's July 17 death outraged many in the city and prompted a commitment by Police Commissioner William Bratton to retrain every officer in the use of force.

A grand jury has been hearing from witnesses since September. A spokesman for the Richmond County District Attorney's Office wouldn't comment on whether a decision to return an indictment or not was imminent.

To be sure, legal experts pointed out that important facts distinguish the cases.

The city Office of the Chief Medical Examiner found that Mr. Garner died in part from the chokehold applied by a police officer trying to arrest him. In Missouri, Michael Brown was killed by gunfire.

In addition, the altercation between Mr. Garner and police was recorded by a witness with a mobile phone. Mr. Brown's death wasn't.

In any event, legal experts said the states' laws regarding the use of force by police bore similarities, with both largely judged to be officer-friendly.

In Missouri, the law states an officer is justified in the use of deadly force when it is "immediately necessary" in cases of an arrest or escape from custody, among other reasons.

In New York, deadly physical force is allowed under several circumstances, including when an officer is protecting people from imminent danger or effecting an arrest of a person carrying a deadly weapon, or when it is needed to defend "the police officer . . . or another person from what the officer reasonably believes to be the use of imminent use of deadly physical force."

Matthew Smalls, a Staten Island defense attorney and former Manhattan assistant district attorney, said the New York state threshold for the use of deadly force was too low.

"If a private citizen feels threatened, his or her use of force has to be reasonable and appropriate based on the perceived threat," Mr. Smalls said.

Police officers, he added, were able to use deadly force in any instance where they feel threatened.

Mr. Smalls pointed to the Nov. 20 fatal shooting of an unarmed black man, Akai Gurley, in the stairwell of a Brooklyn public-housing tower by a rookie officer, an incident described by Mr. Bratton as a "tragic accident".

Maria Haberfeld, a professor of police science at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said despite similarities between the two states in the rules concerning use of force, it didn't follow that the Staten Island grand jury would arrive at the same decision.

This is because the case on Staten Island involved the use of a chokehold, a tactic banned by the NYPD since 1993.

"I don't think in this case the laws are officer-friendly," said Ms. Haberfeld.

The decision in Ferguson could affect jurors' behavior here, said James A. Cohen, an associate professor at Fordham University specializing in criminal procedure and juries.

"There will be some [grand jurors] who paid lots of attention to the stuff going on in Ferguson," he said. "They may well think the result in Ferguson was not a great result."
