U.S. News: Grand Jury Heard Dramatic, Conflicting Testimony

Transcripts of the grand jury investigation into the fatal Aug. 9 shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown by Ferguson, Mo., police officer Darren Wilson show the 70 hours of testimony from 60 witnesses consisted of a dramatic details from Mr. Wilson and investigators, and often conflicting testimony from eyewitnesses and some forensic experts. Highlights from the 24 volumes of transcripts released Monday after St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch announced that the 12-member jury didn't indict Mr. Wilson, include:

During one day of testimony, three eyewitnesses gave different accounts of the confrontation between Messrs. Wilson and Brown shortly before Mr. Brown was killed. One said he saw Mr. Brown, who appeared to already have been shot, stop and clutch his stomach, then walk a step or two toward Mr. Wilson, who then fired the fatal shots.

A second witness said Mr. Brown stopped, then ran "full charge" toward Mr. Wilson, who had his gun drawn and was advancing toward Mr. Brown. A third witness said she saw Mr. Brown's body "jerk," and then saw him turn toward Mr. Wilson with his arms raised when the officer fired his weapon.

Mr. Wilson detailed his version of his encounter with Mr. Brown, saying their physical confrontation began when he tried to open the door to his police car and Mr. Brown pushed it back at him and began hitting him through the open car window. Mr. Wilson said he drew his gun after deciding other weapons, such as mace or his baton, were unreachable or would be ineffective.

He said he and Mr. Brown wrestled with the gun and that Mr. Brown continued to hit him. He said he feared Mr. Brown could knock him out "and then who knows what would happen to me after that."

He finally was able to fire his weapon, he said, through the door of his vehicle, at which point, he said, Mr. Brown "looked up at me and had the most intense aggressive face. The only way I can describe it, it looks like a demon, that's how angry he looked."

After he fired another shot, he said, Mr. Brown started running away, and Mr. Wilson got out of the car and chased him. More shots were fired during the chase.

Another witness testified that shortly after Mr. Brown was killed, a crowd gathered on the street and started "embellishing" details of the incident, including claiming that an officer had run up and shot Mr. Brown in the back and that Mr. Brown had raised his hands high and said: "'Don't shoot, don't shoot.'" This witness said Mr. Brown was facing Mr. Wilson when the officer fired the fatal shots, but wasn't advancing toward Mr. Wilson in a confrontational manner.

A St. Louis County detective who conducted the crime scene investigation said throughout the day on Aug. 9 people gathered around chanting and trying to bypass the police tape. "We fully expected another, I don't want to use the term riot, but an outburst once we did uncover the body and begin to move it," the investigator said.

When he moved to photograph Mr. Brown's body, other officers held screens to block the crowd's view. "It was strictly done to avoid any type of emotional response that we were expecting to happen when the body was uncovered," the investigator said. Mr. Brown's father was allowed inside the crime scene and inside the tarps, he said.

A crime-scene detective for the St. Louis County Police Department said he was told that Mr. Brown might have struggled with Mr. Wilson for control of the officer's gun while Mr. Wilson was seated in his police car, so he swabbed the gun for DNA. He explained that he had to decide whether to check the gun for fingerprints or for DNA (other than Mr. Wilson's), because doing one check would wipe out the ability to do the other. If there was a struggle between Messrs. Wilson and Brown for the gun, the detective said, it was determined they had a better chance of getting results from a DNA test than a fingerprint test. The prosecutor and the detective, however, didn't get into the results of the DNA testing.

In addition to hearing testimony and quizzing witnesses about the evidence, some grand jury members expressed interest in Mr. Brown himself -- why he lived with his grandmother, whether he had attention deficit disorder, if he had a job.

One asked a close friend of Mr. Brown, a witness who had key parts of his testimony challenged by prosecutors, whether Mr. Brown had talked about being harassed by police.

"I think part of the responsibility of the grand jury is to find the truth in all of this," a juror said. "We are here also to get to know Mike. We didn't know him."
