U.S. News: Missouri Protesters Eye Lasting Impact

Protesters are vowing to turn demonstrations against a grand jury's decision not to indict a police officer in a fatal shooting into a movement they say will last long beyond this week.

But the effort faces significant challenges. Experts on social movements say protest leaders, many of whom are new to organizing, may need to connect with more-seasoned groups if they hope to affect tangible changes, such as how police shootings are handled, diversifying police departments and improving relations between law enforcement and minority communities.

Some organizers of the protests, which erupted in dozens of cities nationwide after a grand jury declined to indict a white officer in the Aug. 9 fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson., Mo., acknowledge uncertainty about next steps. And part of their challenge, experts say, will be to harness a groundswell of demands and emotions into new policies and practices.

But organizers say continued controversial incidents involving the use of force by police -- coupled with the ability to share details, connect and express their views on social media -- ensured demonstrators could find ways to carry on.

"This is a living movement," said DeRay McKesson, a 29-year-old human-resources executive at Minneapolis Public Schools who traveled to Ferguson this summer and has become a lead organizer there.

Like many of the thousands who poured into the streets across America in recent days -- temporarily blocking freeways in cities including Los Angeles, Dallas and Atlanta -- Mr. McKesson said he had never been involved in protests before.

But during the past several months, Mr. McKesson and fellow organizers in Ferguson have built a network of followers through social media. Some 10,000 people subscribe to their newsletter, and 20,000 signed up to get a text-message alert on the grand jury's decision.

Days before Monday's grand-jury announcement, Mr. McKesson and colleagues used a public Google document to organize a response in case the Ferguson officer who shot Michael Brown, Darren Wilson, wasn't indicted. It listed everything from protest locations to requisite items for a "protester action kit."

He said demonstrations would continue until officials met their demands, which include assigning special prosecutors to deadly-force cases involving law enforcement and making police departments more diverse. But Mr. McKesson said he wasn't sure how they would go about pushing for those changes.

Rory McVeigh, director of the Center for the Study of Social Movements at the University of Notre Dame, said organizers will need more structure and savvy to engage elected officials with the power to enact policies if they are to sustain momentum. "It strikes me as one of those issues that can easily fade from the public radar screen unless people are well-organized and continue to put the pressure on," Mr. McVeigh said.

He noted that the Occupy Wall Street movement was able to create a public dialogue about economic inequality but it was unclear how successful it was in spurring substantive change. The movement, which peaked in 2011, largely has vanished from view.

For the Ferguson protesters to create a lasting movement, experts said, the mostly inexperienced younger activists will need to link up with veteran organizations, such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, that have resources and relationships with politicians and legal authorities. Some older leaders have sought to join the Ferguson protests, finding common cause with younger organizers. Still, the demonstrations largely involve younger people.
