Lack of Leadership and a Generational Split Hinder Protests in Ferguson

FERGUSON, Mo. -- The unrest in Ferguson began one week ago, on the quiet side street of Canfield Drive, when residents were startled by a series of gunshots and poured out of their homes. They watched and wept as the police stood guard for hours over the body of 18-year-old Michael Brown, splayed face down in the street.

But over time, the demonstrations have changed to become an amalgam of peaceful protesters -- some furious about what they say is endemic abuse of AfricanAmerican by the police -- and separate groups that have carried out acts of violence and looting.

Early Saturday morning, the divisions became even more evident during a four-hour standoff with the police. One group, some of its members wearing bandannas, broke into a liquor store and left clutching bottles of alcohol. But at other retail outlets, like a beauty supply store, demonstrators blocked the looters' way.

Arguments ensued on the streets, with some people pleading to avoid confrontations, while others tried to encourage the crowd to take on law enforcement officers.

Gov. Jay Nixon cited the violent acts on Saturday when he declared a state of emergency and imposed a curfew.

"We will not allow a handful of looters to endanger the rest of this community," he said.

Night after night the streets have attracted disparate groups, some from within Ferguson, and some from hundreds of miles away. As demonstrators gather each evening, it is not unusual to see some people carrying handguns while only a block away parents push their toddlers in strollers. Neither the peaceful protesters nor the hotheaded elements appear to have any direction or a unified leadership.

Many of those on the street say they have shrugged off guidance from elders in the AfricanAmerican establishment, and even from the Brown family, which has repeatedly pleaded for calm.

One protester, DeVone Cruesoe, of the St. Louis area, standing on Canfield Drive last week said, "Do we have a leader? No." Pointing to the spot where Mr. Brown was killed, he said, "You want to know who our leader is? Mike Brown."

The Rev. Jesse L. Jackson arrived at the protest on Friday night. "People were so warm," he said. "It was that kind of celebration."

But he said on Saturday morning that the violent tone of the protest reflected anger over police tactics. Ferguson, he said, is "a metaphor for urban America," where many minorities and poor whites lack access to jobs, transportation and health care.

Many AfricanAmerican civic leaders in St. Louis said they were frustrated by their inability to guide the protesters.

At an emotional meeting at a church on Thursday, clergy members despaired over the seemingly uncontrollable nature of the protest movement and the flare-ups of violence that older people in the group abhorred.

"We had the so-called power brokers here on Tuesday," said the Rev. Robert C. Scott, pastor of Central Baptist Church in St. Louis, referring to a meeting earlier in the week. "Nothing has changed. It has exacerbated. We should not be on the news looking like Iraq or Beirut."

Derrick Robbins, another pastor in attendance, said there had been no negotiations between the police and protesters.

"Everybody's trying to be a leader, but it's not working," he said. "I wish we could come together and have a unified front. That is not happening."

Some people have suggested that there is a generational divide. George Richardson, who works for the building department in East St. Louis, said the younger protesters were acting independently, ignoring advice from their parents.

"There is a gulf between the leadership and the boots on the ground," Mr. Richardson said. "These kids do not understand why the nonviolence movement is the best way to get done what we need to get done. They don't really know what to do." 
