U.S. News: Authorities Wade Deeper Into Teen's Death

FERGUSON, Mo. -- The U.S. Justice Department ordered its own autopsy of the unarmed 18-year-old who was shot and killed by police, adding to a tangle of federal, state and local moves that at times have had authorities working at cross-purposes.

The announcement Sunday came after dozens of Federal Bureau of Investigation agents descended on the St. Louis suburb over the weekend to gather evidence as violent protests resumed following two days of relative peace.

Vandalism erupted again Sunday night after a protest march ended in chaos, with police using smoke to force back marchers.

Earlier, more than 3,000 people, including prominent civil rights leaders, gathered at a "unity rally" to call for greater protection for young black men who encounter police and greater federal intervention in the case of Michael Brown, the AfricanAmerican teen killed Aug. 9 by a white police officer.

Federal and state officials blamed the violence in part on the move Friday by the Ferguson police to release a surveillance video allegedly tying Mr. Brown to a convenience-store robbery, minutes before he was shot by Officer Darren Williams. Police said the incidents weren't related.

St. Louis County police said the officer was pushed into his car and assaulted in a struggle over his gun. He then shot Mr. Brown, the police said.

A lawyer for the Brown family has disputed the police's version, while a widely reported account of a witness said Mr. Brown had raised his hands to surrender when the fatal shots were fired.

Releasing the surveillance video was opposed by federal officials and publicly criticized by Gov. Jay Nixon.

The main investigation into the shooting remains with St. Louis County, but federal officials are conducting a parallel probe into whether Mr. Brown's civil rights were violated.

The Justice Department decision to conduct its own autopsy came at the request of the Brown family. A department spokesman said federal officials also would consider the results of an autopsy performed by local authorities. In addition, the Brown family has hired a pathologist for an autopsy.

In police-misconduct cases, there is often a call for the federal government to take over an investigation to reassure a community that the probe will be thorough and fair. But as much as politicians and residents may want the FBI to run such probes, the Justice Department is wary of letting local authorities abdicate their responsibilities, out of concern it could lead to a lack of local accountability for police conduct, said a federal law-enforcement official.

Moreover, U.S. prosecutors face significant legal limitations when it comes to charging police officers, because, unlike local district attorneys, they can't file charges based on reckless acts, only over violations of civil rights. In such cases federal prosecutors must show an officer took actions with the intent to violate a victim's civil rights. Proving such criminal intent -- as opposed to proving the officer acted with disregard for life -- is a much higher burden.

"It's harder for the federal government to bring a criminal charge in a case like this, where a police officer used force in the course of trying to carry out their duties and then the question is, did they go too far," said Alan Vinegrad, a former federal prosecutor.

Mr. Vinegrad once tried four New York City police officers on civil rights charges for assaulting a Haitian immigrant. That case marked the rare instance where the U.S. took over such a case.

Members of Congress in New York recently called on federal prosecutors to take over the investigation of officers involved in the chokehold death of Eric Garner, whose arrest was videotaped. The Justice Department is tracking the case but so far has resisted calls to take it away from the local district attorney.

In Missouri, the Ferguson police chief announced early last week the FBI would to take over the Brown investigation. That surprised FBI officials in Washington, who don't plan to assume the case from St. Louis County officials.

Mr. Holder, the attorney general, rewrote a statement about Ferguson he was planning to issue to emphasize he expected local authorities "to complete a thorough, fair investigation in their own right," even though the FBI had opened its own case into whether Mr. Brown's civil rights had been violated, a law-enforcement official said.

The two sides also clashed later in the week over the Ferguson Police Department's plan to release the surveillance tape of the convenience-store robbery. Lawyers in the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division objected, saying it would anger the community and intensify protests by those who felt it was an attack on Mr. Brown's reputation rather than an evenhanded disclosure of information, law-enforcement officials said.

The police department decided to release the video Friday. Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson said last week the move came in response to numerous media freedom-of-information requests.

Federal, state, and local authorities also have disagreed publicly over the tactics and equipment deployed to deal with protests.

"Tell them to remove the damn tanks," Mr. Holder told his deputies on Thursday, according to a law-enforcement official, referring to heavily armored vehicles the local police had used. That day there were discussions among local officials about how to scale back the armed presence, officials said.

St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar said last week he was proud of the restraint shown by his officers, who did the bulk of police response to the protests before the state highway patrol got involved.

Mr. Nixon on Thursday handed authority for security in Ferguson to State Patrol Capt. Ronald Johnson, an AfricanAmerican who grew up in the Ferguson area and was widely embraced by demonstrators. But the move wasn't enough to end the violence.
