Seeking an End to Tensions --- Cardinal Dolan, Officials Call for Calm Before March to Protest Garner Death

Mayor Bill de Blasio met with Cardinal Timothy Dolan and a group of other religious leaders on Wednesday to soothe tensions ahead of Saturday's march to protest the death of a Staten Island man in police custody.

The round-table discussion at the cardinal's residence at St. Patrick's Cathedral comes weeks after the mayor hosted a public forum on crime at City Hall where the Rev. Al Sharpton criticized Police Commissioner William Bratton, who was there.

Messrs. Sharpton and Bratton both attended Wednesday's meeting with the cardinal.

The July 17 death of Eric Garner -- and the public outcry that followed -- is the first significant civil rights test for Mr. de Blasio, who seeks to fulfill his campaign pledge to improve relations between the police and minority communities.

Mr. Garner, 43 years old, was confronted by police on Staten Island for allegedly selling untaxed cigarettes. He argued with officers, and one placed him in an apparent chokehold, a tactic banned by the police department.

Mr. Garner died about an hour later; after an autopsy, the medical examiner listed a chokehold as a cause of death.

Mr. de Blasio said the goal of Wednesday's meeting was to discuss moving the city forward and "put behind us divisions" following Mr. Garner's death.

"We want this to be a transcendent moment for this city," Mr. de Blasio said at a news conference after the closed-door session. "We've experienced a tragedy with the death of Eric Garner, but this isn't about a single incident or being mired in the past. This is about a very purposeful and consistent effort forward. It has to be done -- it is a way of saving lives."

The mayor described the gathering as "extraordinary" and "uplifting" and said he hoped it would be healing for the public. Cardinal Dolan and the other leaders will "help us send a message of peace and reconciliation all over this city," he said.

Cardinal Dolan, the archbishop of New York since 2009, said Mr. Garner's death has caused "a lot of tears and sobbing." But he said he is hopeful something positive could come from the incident.

"I think when all is said and done that the healing, the reconciliation, the progress that has begun is going to continue," Cardinal Dolan said. "God's going to bring good out of this setback."

The mayor, Mr. Bratton and Mr. Sharpton, who is leading Saturday's march on Staten Island, said they don't expect, nor will they tolerate, any violence during the coming protest.

"You cannot fight reckless violence -- or alleged reckless violence -- by becoming that," Mr. Sharpton said. "There is a difference between thugs and activists. We're activists. We're not thugs. And we won't harbor thugs."

Mr. Sharpton's comments echoed those of some community leaders in Ferguson, Mo., where 18-year-old Michael Brown was fatally shot by a police officer on Aug. 9.

Those leaders in Missouri have said outside actors are inciting conflicts with the police.

Councilman Jumaane Williams, a Brooklyn Democrat, said community anger about Mr. Garner's case and others like it should be channeled constructively. Still, he said, "Why do we just go ahead and expect that there will be no violence?"

"We should expect people to express themselves in all manners when these things are happening," he said.

At the last round table on July 31, Mr. de Blasio had hoped to provide the city with a healing public event. But the event seemed less to diffuse tensions than inflame them, with Mr. Sharpton sharply criticizing the police department. Others assailed the mayor for giving Mr. Sharpton such a prominent role.

Mr. Sharpton said he didn't believe Wednesday's meeting was terribly different from the one a few weeks ago.

"It was the same tone," Mr. Sharpton said. "There was a lot of distortion from the last one. Candid conversation among adults should not be treated as anything other than that."

Mr. de Blasio's spokesman, Phil Walzak, said the mayor will engage religious leaders more frequently as he seeks to improve police-community relations.

Christina Greer, associate professor of political science at Fordham University, said she is concerned that she doesn't hear enough urgency from Mr. de Blasio or a substantive action plan to confront the "larger landscape" of issues that Mr. Garner's case represents.

"The time for speeches and closed door meetings and tasks forces is over. It is no longer incidents -- we're looking at patterns of violence against black men," Ms. Greer said. "These are things that have collectively traumatized New Yorkers."

Imam Talib Al-Hajj Abdur-Rashid, president of the Islamic Leadership Council of Metropolitan New York, said Wednesday's meeting wasn't intended to be a "kumbaya moment."

He said the leaders gathered to pursue a substantive solution to a "grave and enduring problem."
