U.S. News: Companies, Schools Affected by Turmoil --- In Ferguson Area, Business Is Down, Classes Canceled, Police Forces Strained

FERGUSON, Mo. -- More than a week after the police shooting of an unarmed teenager, this St. Louis suburb is finding it harder to pick up the pieces following repeated nights of turmoil.

One school system has delayed the start of the academic year, in part because buses can't get through streets littered with debris. Business owners face broken windows and a drop in revenue, forcing them to reduce their workforce. Police forces are strained. And residents say the turmoil is nerve-racking.

"When do the protests stop?" said Mark Byrne, Ferguson City Council member for Ward 1, where 18-year-old Michael Brown died and where the protests have been centered.

The Ferguson-Florissant School District, which enrolls more than 11,000 students, canceled classes starting last Thursday and doesn't plan to being its school year until Monday.

"The number one thing was allowing time here for law enforcement to restore stability to the area," said district spokeswoman Jana Shortt. "And the other reason is that we have parents and students who have daily decisions based on the events of the previous night -- that's difficult for our families."

For businesses, the violence poses other issues.

"This is not the kind of attention that Ferguson, St. Louis or any other community would want to have, but the world will also see how we will work together coming out of this," said Joe Reagan, chief executive of the St. Louis Regional Chamber, a business group.

"Right now we have businesses having to struggle to stay open and to serve customers, dealing with fires and damages to their property," he said.

Mr. Reagan's staff has contacted companies that are considering moving to the region. "We have not had any business that has pulled back from making a decision here," he said.

Other businesses are less sanguine.

Jim Bolin, store supervisor at a Meineke car-repair store located outside the protest zone, said revenue had tanked. When a customer with bad brakes crashed through a front window of the business accidently, Mr. Bolin said he felt compelled to spray paint the boarded-up window with "Bad Brakes Did This."

Up the road, Queeny Thomas, 27, who works at Title Max, a car-title-loan company, said some customers are shying away from coming to the storefront business. A Missouri Department of Revenue location next door closed Monday. The auto-body shop across the street pleads for calm with signs that say "May God's peace be upon everyone. Pray for each other."

Emerson Electric Co., a technology company that has offices about a half-mile from the protests, provided employees with suggested routes to and from work, but otherwise has seen no impact, a spokesman said.

Mayor Reggie Jones of Dellwood, an adjacent city where stores have been damaged, said the protests scared residents and harmed the business climate.

Joe O'Donnell, owner of a Papa John's Pizza franchise in Dellwood, said demonstrators broke three of his four front windows and slammed a computer to the ground Sunday night, causing a couple of thousand dollars in damage.

"Last week we did about 65% of what we normally do in business," said Mr. O'Donnell, who added he has cut back by four employees each day and closed early at times.

Gregg Hall, police chief in nearby Hazelwood, said he has deployed up to seven of his officers almost daily to Ferguson since the protests began. Mr. Hall also beefed up the number of officers working to protect Hazelwood, noting the uncertainty of whether the protests might move into his community.

"We have 68 police officers. For three or four days there, everyone worked 12-hour shifts with no days off," he said.

Melissa Fitzgerald said the shooting cracked open a divide in Ferguson that needs to be addressed. The mother of three formed a group called Parents for Peace, which has more than 2,000 members on Facebook.

"This is a nice community with friendly neighbors," said the 38-year-old. "We just have to have some honest, tough conversations, or nothing will change."
