1	 s, however." "The Republican National Committee has dispatched staffers dedicated to African-American ""engagement"" to 14 states, including Georgia, North Carolina, Louisiana and Arkansas." "At churches and campaign events, African-American leaders are invoking Republican opposition to reauthorizing the Voting Rights Act, the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., and sporadic calls to impeach the president." "At churches and campaign events, African-American leaders are invoking Republican opposition to reauthorizing the Voting Rights Act, the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., and sporadic calls to impeach the president." "Those issues res	AA_sent.txt	0	1
2	 ers are invoking Republican opposition to reauthorizing the Voting Rights Act, the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., and sporadic calls to impeach the president." "At churches and campaign events, African-American leaders are invoking Republican opposition to reauthorizing the Voting Rights Act, the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., and sporadic calls to impeach the president." "Those issues resonated with African-American congregants at the New Birth Missionary Baptist Church in Lithonia, Ga., on a recent Sunday." "White evangelical congregations have long served as a rallying spot for Republicans, just as African-American churches hav	AA_sent.txt	0	2
3	  mostly black." "It is also true that young black men-- or rather, young men-- commit crimes, often violent and whose victims are also mostly black." Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon put the state highway patrol in charge of security here Thursday in hopes of quelling nightly clashes between protesters angry over a police shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager and SWAT teams using tear gas. "A Staten Island rally for a man who died in an apparent police chokehold will include protests over the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager in Missouri, march organizers said, as civil-rights leaders have begun linking the two deaths." "Earlier, more than 3,000 people, including promine	black_sent.txt	1	1
4	  highway patrol in charge of security here Thursday in hopes of quelling nightly clashes between protesters angry over a police shooting of an unarmed black teenager and SWAT teams using tear gas. "A Staten Island rally for a man who died in an apparent police chokehold will include protests over the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager in Missouri, march organizers said, as civil-rights leaders have begun linking the two deaths." "Earlier, more than 3,000 people, including prominent civil rights leaders gathered at a ""unity rally"" to call for greater protection for young black men who encounter police and greater federal intervention in the case of Michae	black_sent.txt	1	2
5	 Americ" "Earlier, more than 3,000 people, including prominent civil rights leaders gathered at a ""unity rally"" to call for greater protection for young black men who encounter police and greater federal intervention in the case of Michael Brown, the African-Americ" "The Federal Bureau of Investigation opened a probe into the shooting death of an 	unarmed black teenager in this St. Louis suburb, as more unrest broke out late Monday following looting and widespread property damage the previous night." """Hands up, don't shoot!"" has become the rallying cry for protesters and their supporters in this predominantly black city, where an unarmed 18-year-old was shot and killed by a police 	black_sent.txt	1	3
6	  the Aug. 9 death of the unarmed teenager, and said he understood their concerns because of his own experiences as a black man." Mr. Holder's visit coincided with the first day a local grand jury began to review the shooting of the black teenager by a white officer that has sparked days of unrest. "An 	unarmed black man resists arrest, a white police officer uses force, the black man dies and a city is left waiting for answers" "An unarmed black man resists arrest, a white police officer uses force, the black man dies and a city is left waiting for answers" "Mr. Smalls pointed to the Nov. 20 fatal shooting of 	black_sent.txt	1	4
7	 's visit coincided with the first day a local grand jury began to review the shooting of the black teenager by a white officer that has sparked days of unrest. "An unarmed black man resists arrest, a white police officer uses force, the black man dies and a city is left waiting for answers" "An 	unarmed black man resists arrest, a white police officer uses force, the black man dies and a city is left waiting for answers" "Mr. Smalls pointed to the Nov. 20 fatal shooting of an unarmed black man, Akai Gurley, in the stairwell of a Brooklyn public-housing tower by a rookie officer, an incident described by Mr. 	black_sent.txt	1	5
8	  man resists arrest, a white police officer uses force, the black man dies and a city is left waiting for answers" "An unarmed black man resists arrest, a white police officer uses force, the black man dies and a city is left waiting for answers" "Mr. Smalls pointed to the Nov. 20 fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black man, Akai Gurley, in the stairwell of a Brooklyn public-housing tower by a rookie officer, an incident described by Mr. Bratton as a ""tragic accident""." Demonstrators massed inside and outside Macy's on Herald Square on Black Friday in a bid to flex economic power following a Missouri grand jury's decision not 	black_sent.txt	1	6
9	  in the fatal shooting of a black teenager. "Protesters in New York City and other cities have staged almost daily demonstrations since a grand jury earlier this week declined to indict Darren Wilson, a whiteFerguson, Mo., police officer who last summer shot and killed a black teenager, Michael Brow" "The police officer who killed an 	unarmed black 18-year-old this summer and resigned from the force Saturday left his job voluntarily and won't receive severance or benefits, officials said Sunday." "They came on a day when Mr. Obama spent much of his time grappling with the fallout of a grand jury's decision not to indict a white police officer 	black_sent.txt	1	7
10	  spent much of his time grappling with the fallout of a grand jury's decision not to indict a white police officer for the fatal shooting in August of an unarmed, black 18-year-old in the St. Louis suburb." "Police body cameras have gained considerable currency in the wake of the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black 18-year-old in Ferguson, Mo., this summer." The nation's first black president and first black attorney general have been outspoken about their concerns surrounding the shooting death of Michael Brown inFerguson and the apparent choking death of Eric Garner on Staten Island. In the span of two week The nation's first black 	black_sent.txt	1	8
11	  black president and first black attorney general have been outspoken about their concerns surrounding the shooting death of Michael Brown inFerguson and the apparent choking death of Eric Garner on Staten Island. In the span of two week "The decision by a grand jury not to indict Ferguson, Missouri police officer Darren Wilson for shooting 	unarmed black teenager Michael Brown is such a test for America." "A jury of a dozen average citizens, chosen long before this case came before them and including three black Americans, looked at 70 hours of testimony, heard 60 witnesses and deliberated for two days. " "The failure to indict will disappoint, and even infuriate, many who believe Mic	black_sent.txt	1	9
12	 , looked at 70 hours of testimony, heard 60 witnesses and deliberated for two days. " "The failure to indict will disappoint, and even infuriate, many who believe Michael Brown is like too many other young black men who have been killed by police." "A grand jury declined to indict a white police officer in the shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager whose death in the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson became a national flash point on race, justice and policing. " "The national debate started over the death of Mr. Brown and, more broadly, the treatment of young, black men by police. " "The prosecutor also said that he couldn't give the breakdown in the 	black_sent.txt	1	10
13	  about the black experience, as when he said that Trayvon Martin, the 17-year-old African-American shot and killed by a Hispanic man in 2012, ""could have been me 35 years ago.""" But Mr. Obama has offered a relatively muted response to the furor over the decision not to indict the white police officer who shot an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson.  the now 77-year-old black comedian said at an NAACP event commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Supreme Court's Brown v. Board of Education decision Mr. Cosby is not the only black person to ask about the troubling excuses that so many civil-rights leaders are making for criminal behavior "	black_sent.txt	1	11
14	  among white people, black people and everyone else - the drug dealers, the gang bangers, the corrupt unions defending bad schools and the musicians and actors wh" "Police have stepped up arrests here in a bid to root out those they consider outside agitators without further angering peaceful demonstrators, as unrest following the dealth of an 	unarmed black teen showed few signs of abating." "Some organizers of the protests, which erupted in dozens of cities nationwide after a grand jury declined to indict a white officier in the Aug. 9 fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, MO, acknowledge uncertainty about next steps." "Thursday marked another day of protests in the 	black_sent.txt	1	12
15	  out those they consider outside agitators without further angering peaceful demonstrators, as unrest following the dealth of an unarmed black teen showed few signs of abating." "Some organizers of the protests, which erupted in dozens of cities nationwide after a grand jury declined to indict a white officier in the Aug. 9 fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, MO, acknowledge uncertainty about next steps." "Thursday marked another day of protests in the city stemming from the decision announced Monday by a grand jury not to indict a white officer in Ferguson, MO, who fatally shot an unarmed black teenager" "In 1992, riots sparked by the beating of a black man, 	black_sent.txt	1	13
16	  to indict a white officier in the Aug. 9 fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, MO, acknowledge uncertainty about next steps." "Thursday marked another day of protests in the city stemming from the decision announced Monday by a grand jury not to indict a white officer in Ferguson, MO, who fatally shot an 	unarmed black teenager" "In 1992, riots sparked by the beating of a black man, Rodney King, left thousands of stores looted and burned, with property damage estimated at $1 billion." "On a balmy Saturday night in April 2001, an unarmed 19-year-old black man, Timothy Thomas, was shot and killed by a white Cincinnati police officer, Stephen Roach." "	black_sent.txt	1	14
17	  and white families mill about stalls of fresh tomatoes and loaves of cinnamon bread, as pop music blaring from loudspeakers is drowned out by the sounds of children laughing." "It is a slice of normalcy in a city that is still reeling from the Aug. 9 shooting by a white police officer of Michael Brown, an 	unarmed black teenager, who will be buried Monday." And it highlights the contradictions in a place that carved out a rare existence: a multiracial community surrounded by cities that white flight and St. Louis's black diaspora had left overwhelmingly African-American or white. And it highlights the contradictions in a place that carved out a 	black_sent.txt	1	15
18	  how authorities handled the death of Mr. Brown, and some felt his killing had unmasked the deep divide between police and the black community." "The Justice Department plans to open a broad inquiry into possible misconduct in the Ferguson, Mo., police department, which has been criticized since one of its officers shot and killed an 	unarmed black 18-year-old last month, according to people familia" Protest organizers in the St. Louis area hoped to draw crowds this weekend from all over the country to a region that has seen almost nightly demonstrations since the mid-August shooting death of a black teen by a white police officer. The weekend events come 	black_sent.txt	1	16
19	  mid-August shooting death of a black teen by a white police officer. The weekend events come days after the police-involved shooting death of black teenager Vonderrit Myers by an off-duty white officer in St. Louis's Shaw neighborhood Wednesday evening. "In the suburb of Ferguson, the Aug. 9 police-involved shooting death of 	unarmed black teen Michael Brown led to weeks of protests, which included looting and confrontations with the police department." Fresh Protests Hit St. Louis Area --- At Least 17 Arrested During Weekend Events Marking the Shooting Deaths of Black Teens by Police "Thousands gathered in this Midwest city shaken by recent shootings of young black men	black_sent.txt	1	17
20	  marched through downtown St. Louis to protest the deaths of Mr. Brown and Vonderrit Myers, a black 18-year-old who was killed by an off-duty white officer in St. Louis's Shaw neighborhood last week." "Over the past ten days, separate grand juries decided not to indict white police officers in the deaths of 	unarmed black men." "Rep. Marcia Fudge (D., Ohio), the departing head of the Congressional Black Caucus, said the moment ""has struck a chord in the conscience of this country.""" "After a white Milwaukee police officer shot and killed a mentally ill black man who had grabbed his baton, Chief Edward Flynn fired the officer not for 	black_sent.txt	1	18
21	  improper pat-down that led to the con" "Protests rippled across the country Thursday, a day after a grand jury didn't charge a New York City police officer in the death of a black man who allegedly was selling untaxed cigarettes last summer." "In both cases, the officers were white and the victims were 	unarmed black men." "Mr. Sharpton said he would be joined by relatives of Mr. Garner and Mr. Brown, and the family of Akai Gurley, the 28-year-old black man accidentally shot last month by a rookie NYPD officer in the stairwell of a Brooklyn housing project. " U.S. News: Thousands Take to the Streets in Protest --- 	black_sent.txt	1	19
22	  of a Brooklyn housing project. " U.S. News: Thousands Take to the Streets in Protest --- Demonstrators Nationwide Turn Out for Second Night After Grand Juries Decline to Charge Police in Deaths of Black Men  The Brooklyn district attorney is planning to impanel a grand jury to consider charges in the Nov. 20 shooting death of an 	unarmed black man at the hands of a New York City police officer.  The probe into the death of Akai Gurley announced Friday by District Attorney Ken Thompson comes amid protests across the country after two grand juries declined to indict officers involved in the deaths of two other unarmed black men: Eric Garner on Stat "	black_sent.txt	1	20
23	  the Nov. 20 shooting death of an unarmed black man at the hands of a New York City police officer.  The probe into the death of Akai Gurley announced Friday by District Attorney Ken Thompson comes amid protests across the country after two grand juries declined to indict officers involved in the deaths of two other 	unarmed black men: Eric Garner on Stat "Another round of protests erupted Friday in major cities as demonstrators blocked traffic and staged ""die-ins"" following this week's grand jury decision in New York not to indict a white officer in the choke-hold death of an unarmed black man." "Angry protesters were still gathering on 	black_sent.txt	1	21
24	  officers involved in the deaths of two other unarmed black men: Eric Garner on Stat "Another round of protests erupted Friday in major cities as demonstrators blocked traffic and staged ""die-ins"" following this week's grand jury decision in New York not to indict a white officer in the choke-hold death of an 	unarmed black man." "Angry protesters were still gathering on the fly in some cities, but in other places it is clear that protestors have become organized in the months after spontaneous protests erupted over the death of Mr. Brown, the black 18-year-old shot by a white poli" "Following decisions by grand juries in New York 	black_sent.txt	1	22
25	  black 18-year-old shot by a white poli" "Following decisions by grand juries in New York and Missouri not to indict white police officers involved in the deaths of two black men, protests persisted in major urban areas, including New York, Chicago, Atlanta, Miami and Boston." "One month after the police shooting death of an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., local officials met Tuesday night for a heated three-hour public session where they introduced plans to overhaul police oversight and the court system" "According to a recent report, 86% of vehicle stops in Ferguson involved a black driver." "The incident, police said, appeared to be unrelated to the civil u	black_sent.txt	1	23
26	  met Tuesday night for a heated three-hour public session where they introduced plans to overhaul police oversight and the court system" "According to a recent report, 86% of vehicle stops in Ferguson involved a black driver." "The incident, police said, appeared to be unrelated to the civil unrest in the St. Louis suburb where an 	unarmed black teen was fatally shot by a white police officer in August." "Southern Democrats are counting on targeted ads, voter outreach and rallies headlined by first lady Michelle Obama, the Congressional Black Caucus and, possibly, former President Bill Clinton." "In Louisiana, Ms. Landrieu is relying, in part, on her family's high profile in 	black_sent.txt	1	24
27	 ng to a new state law that limits early voting and requires voters to show photo identification." The Congressional Black Caucus is also raising issues white voters won't hear on television. "At churches and campaign events, African-American leaders are invoking Republican opposition to reauthorizing the Voting Rights Act, the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., and sporadic calls to impeach the president." "At churches and campaign events, African-American leaders are invoking Republican opposition to reauthorizing the Voting Rights Act, the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., and sporadic calls to impeach the president." "An off-duty St. 	black_sent.txt	1	25
28	 ers are invoking Republican opposition to reauthorizing the Voting Rights Act, the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., and sporadic calls to impeach the president." "At churches and campaign events, African-American leaders are invoking Republican opposition to reauthorizing the Voting Rights Act, the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., and sporadic calls to impeach the president." "An off-duty St. Louis police officer shot and killed a black teenager Wednesday evening, triggering protests in a metropolitan area that has been rattled by sometimes violent unrest after a high-profile police shooting in August." "The protests come nearly two m	black_sent.txt	1	26
29	  calls to impeach the president." "An off-duty St. Louis police officer shot and killed a black teenager Wednesday evening, triggering protests in a metropolitan area that has been rattled by sometimes violent unrest after a high-profile police shooting in August." "The protests come nearly two months after the Aug. 9 shooting death of an 	unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, by a white Ferguson officer, Darren Wilson." "With that, a white member said she met a black woman who became one of her closest friends." "A common complaint from white members, Mr. DeYmaz said, is that churches do too much to accomodate the preferences of black members." "Jaddie Edwards, a black 	black_sent.txt	1	27
30	  local riots that broke out after a 2001 police shooting of a young black man." "In one session, a white man, Jason Scott, recalled being attacked by several black students after a flag football game in college." "Mr. Obama's closest adviser, Valerie Jarrett, conferred with Mr. Sharpton in August about the police killing of an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., as Mr. Sharpton led protests against the Ferguson police." In 1991 a Hasidic driver in Brooklyn's Crown Heights accidentally ran onto a sidewalk and killed a 7-year-old black child named Gavin Cato. Mr. Sharpton pointedly declined to endorse the sole black candidate in the Democratic primary last year. Candi	black_sent.txt	1	28
31	  responsible for the high homicide risk faced by black teens, and it is proactive policing that has dramatically reduced that risk, saving thousands of young lives in places like New York City." "The issue has gained new attention in the wake of the police response to protests in Ferugson, Mo., over the killing of a 	unarmed black teenager by police." "Messrs. Garner and Brown, both unarmed black men who died in violent confrontation with police in New York and Ferguson, Mo., respectively, have become central figures in a protest movement that says it wants profound changes in the policing of minority c" "Even as demonstrations spurred by anger over police kill	black_sent.txt	1	29
32	 , and it is proactive policing that has dramatically reduced that risk, saving thousands of young lives in places like New York City." "The issue has gained new attention in the wake of the police response to protests in Ferugson, Mo., over the killing of a unarmed black teenager by police." "Messrs. Garner and Brown, both 	unarmed black men who died in violent confrontation with police in New York and Ferguson, Mo., respectively, have become central figures in a protest movement that says it wants profound changes in the policing of minority c" "Even as demonstrations spurred by anger over police killings of unarmed black men have died down elsewhere in the 	black_sent.txt	1	30
33	  teenager by police." "Messrs. Garner and Brown, both unarmed black men who died in violent confrontation with police in New York and Ferguson, Mo., respectively, have become central figures in a protest movement that says it wants profound changes in the policing of minority c" "Even as demonstrations spurred by anger over police killings of 	unarmed black men have died down elsewhere in the U.S., protests in the Bay Area cities of Oakland and Berkeley have continued unabated, reflecting the region's long history of social activis" "The Black Panther Party was founded there in 1966; more recently, the Occupy Wall Street movement orchestrated extensive activities. Memories of a 2009 shoo	black_sent.txt	1	31
34	 lsewhere in the U.S., protests in the Bay Area cities of Oakland and Berkeley have continued unabated, reflecting the region's long history of social activis" "The Black Panther Party was founded there in 1966; more recently, the Occupy Wall Street movement orchestrated extensive activities. Memories of a 2009 shooting by transit police of another 	unarmed black man, Oscar Grant, are fresh in the minds of many." Authorities said Officers Rafael Ramos and Wenjian Liu were gunned down by a man who appears to have targeted them in retaliation for the deaths this year of Eric Garner and Michael Brown -- unarmed black men who died in confrontations with police in New  "	black_sent.txt	1	32
35	  activities. Memories of a 2009 shooting by transit police of another unarmed black man, Oscar Grant, are fresh in the minds of many." Authorities said Officers Rafael Ramos and Wenjian Liu were gunned down by a man who appears to have targeted them in retaliation for the deaths this year of Eric Garner and Michael Brown -- 	unarmed black men who died in confrontations with police in New  "Former Mayor David Dinkins, the city's first and only black mayor, urged Mr. de Blasio and the police union leadership to meet and mend the rift." "Other allies stood by him. Eric Adams, a black former police captain and the Brooklyn borough president, said 	black_sent.txt	1	33
36	  him. Eric Adams, a black former police captain and the Brooklyn borough president, said the mayor's response expressed the sort of personal urgency and fears that people of color in the city feel about their children." "Relations between police and the community have been strained in Oakland, Calif., since the 2009 fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black man, Oscar Grant III, by a white transit officer." "Most recently, riots broke out in the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson, Mo., first after an unarmed black man was killed by a police officer in August and last month after a grand jury declined to bring criminal charges against the officer." "Relations between police 	black_sent.txt	1	34
37	  people of color in the city feel about their children." "Relations between police and the community have been strained in Oakland, Calif., since the 2009 fatal shooting of an unarmed black man, Oscar Grant III, by a white transit officer." "Most recently, riots broke out in the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson, Mo., first after an 	unarmed black man was killed by a police officer in August and last month after a grand jury declined to bring criminal charges against the officer." "Relations between police and the community have been strained in Oakland, Calif., since the 2009 fatal shooting of an unarmed black man, Oscar Grant III, by a white transit officer." Anti-	black_sent.txt	1	35
38	  in the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson, Mo., first after an unarmed black man was killed by a police officer in August and last month after a grand jury declined to bring criminal charges against the officer." "Relations between police and the community have been strained in Oakland, Calif., since the 2009 fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black man, Oscar Grant III, by a white transit officer." Anti-police activists have continued demonstrations on a regular basis against that and what they call other instances of police abuse against blacks and other minorities in Oakland. "Cities across the U.S. are struggling to redefine the relationship between police and their communiti	black_sent.txt	1	36
39	 y a white transit officer." Anti-police activists have continued demonstrations on a regular basis against that and what they call other instances of police abuse against blacks and other minorities in Oakland. "Cities across the U.S. are struggling to redefine the relationship between police and their communities, as killings by white officers of 	unarmed black men inFerguson, Mo., and New York City have raised the stakes." "Economic tensions also persist, with the wealth of white households 13 times the median wealth of black households in 2013, according to a Pew Research Center analysis." The police-department overhaul was sparked by the April 2001 killing of an unarmed 19-year-old black 	black_sent.txt	1	37
40	  white turnout in states like Georgia and Indiana after voter ID laws passed. "Soon after the Aug. 9 fatal shooting of black teenager Michael Brown by white police officer Darren Wilson, a grand jury began deciding whether to indict the officer for his role in the death." "A highly anticipated autopsy report Monday showed a young, 	unarmed black man whom police shot and killed in August had fatal gunshot wounds on his back and abdomen, including one likely at close range." "The Aug. 11 shooting death of Ezell Ford, 25 years old, happened just two days after another unarmed black man, Michael Brown, was fatally shot by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo." "Ms. 	black_sent.txt	1	38
41	  for his role in the death." "A highly anticipated autopsy report Monday showed a young, unarmed black man whom police shot and killed in August had fatal gunshot wounds on his back and abdomen, including one likely at close range." "The Aug. 11 shooting death of Ezell Ford, 25 years old, happened just two days after another 	unarmed black man, Michael Brown, was fatally shot by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo." "Ms. O'Toole, who became head of the 1,350-officer force in June, said police showed admirable but excessive restraint when pelted with stones and bottles at a protest related to the death of Michael Brown, the Ferguson, Mo., black teen shot 	black_sent.txt	1	39
42	  our denomination, about experiences that black Christians face that " "Perhaps the most pointed statement was made by Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers, who tweeted, ""The system enables young black men to be killed behind the mask of law.""" "The FBI on Monday launched a civil rights investigation into the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager by a police officer, an incident that has set off days of unrest in this St. Louis suburb and pushed the question of racial fairness again to the " An unarmed black teenager named Michael Brown was shot and killed Saturday by a police officer in suburban St. Louis. "Now Brown is part of 	black_sent.txt	1	40
43	  to be killed behind the mask of law.""" "The FBI on Monday launched a civil rights investigation into the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager by a police officer, an incident that has set off days of unrest in this St. Louis suburb and pushed the question of racial fairness again to the " An 	unarmed black teenager named Michael Brown was shot and killed Saturday by a police officer in suburban St. Louis. "Now Brown is part of a renewed national discussion about how police treat minorities, especially young black men." A sizable black population. An 18-year-old black man named Michael Brown was fatally shot by police there. For 	black_sent.txt	1	41
44	  population. An 18-year-old black man named Michael Brown was fatally shot by police there. For years he has complained about St. Louis police and how crime is handled in his predominantly black neighborhood. "SWAT teams and angry protesters clashed in a small St. Louis suburb for a third day Tuesday, following the death of 	unarmed black teen-ager Michael Brown." "While I certainly do not condone rioting, examining the conditions surrounding Brown's death - and the deaths of several other unarmed black men killed by law enforcement recently - makes clear that community reactions like those in Ferguson, Mo., are bou" "Ferguson has suffered from ""white flight"" in rece	black_sent.txt	1	42
45	  crime is handled in his predominantly black neighborhood. "SWAT teams and angry protesters clashed in a small St. Louis suburb for a third day Tuesday, following the death of unarmed black teen-ager Michael Brown." "While I certainly do not condone rioting, examining the conditions surrounding Brown's death - and the deaths of several other 	unarmed black men killed by law enforcement recently - makes clear that community reactions like those in Ferguson, Mo., are bou" "Ferguson has suffered from ""white flight"" in recent years, leaving pockets of structural poverty and deeply alienated black people." "Authorities often see fit to heavily police towns with growing black and poor popul	black_sent.txt	1	43
46	 rievances." Practices like stop-and-frisk have exacerbated tensions between blacks and police officers. "At the same time, police departments are increasingly militarized, applying military-grade weapons to a domestic population - especially to those they see as criminal - and effectively criminalizing the everyday lives of black people." "When an 	unarmed black teenager and a police officer crossed paths here last weekend with fatal results, the incident cast a blinding spotlight on a small police department struggling for authority and relevance in a changing community." "That's a significant increase from 2000, when blacks made up just over half of the population." "For at least a decade, 	black_sent.txt	1	44
47	  changing community." "That's a significant increase from 2000, when blacks made up just over half of the population." "For at least a decade, there have been complaints about racial tensions between police and black communities in the St. Louis County area." "Confrontations in Ferguson, Missouri set off by Saturday's fatal police shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager have raised questions not just about the conduct of one officer, but also about the makeup of an entire police force." How could a community that's two-thirds black have a police force that's almost entirely white? "Meanwhile, in more than 40 percent of cities, blacks are under-represented among police officers, 	black_sent.txt	1	45
48	 d whites only account for one-third of the local population, and a slightly higher proportion of the police; Hispanics make up 63 percent of the population, and 58 percent of the police." "FERGUSON, Mo. - Federal and state officials unveiled a sweeping response Thursday to violent clashes between police and protesters over the shooting death of an 	unarmed black teenager, with Missouri taking over security operations from local police and au" "Obama, at times, has spoken on a deeply personal level about his own feelings on race, but he also has been criticized by black leaders for not speaking out quickly or forcefully enough." "Anthea Butler, a religion and black studies professor at 	black_sent.txt	1	46
49	  William Brooks, who traveled to Ferguson on Monday, said he hoped that Obama's involvement would spark a national dialogue over the persecution and harassment of black residents by police in their own communities." "Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson said officers would “facilitate” protests, which began on Sunday after a police officer shot an 	unarmed black teenager on Saturday." "The August 1965 riots were raging, incited by the arrest of a young black motorist by a white highway patrolman, and a violent clash between police and the community." "In Ferguson, Mo., where a police officer killed an unarmed young black man on Saturday" "that led to rioting in black communities in 	black_sent.txt	1	47
50	  Canfield Drive in the middle of a summer Saturday." "In interview after interview, black men and women talked about their fears of random stops while driving in the city, as well as in neighboring municipalities." "Closer to home, there were violent clashes between police and protesters in Ferguson, Mo., after the shooting death of an 	unarmed black teenager by police" "Obama was careful, particularly during his 2008 campaign, not to cast himself as a black man running for president but rather as a man running for president who just happened to be black." "Obama was careful, particularly during his 2008 campaign, not to cast himself as a black man running for president but 	black_sent.txt	1	48
51	  for president but rather as a man running for president who just happened to be black." "Obama was careful, particularly during his 2008 campaign, not to cast himself as a black man running for president but rather as a man running for president who just happened to be black." "On the death of Michael Brown, the 	unarmed black teenager fatally shot more than a week ago in Ferguson, Mo., Obama first issued a paragraph-long statement that read in part:" "The federal government on Sunday took on an intensified role in investigating the fatal police shooting of an unarmed black teenager, as Missouri officials defended their tough response to continuing protests	black_sent.txt	1	49
52	  who just happened to be black." "On the death of Michael Brown, the unarmed black teenager fatally shot more than a week ago in Ferguson, Mo., Obama first issued a paragraph-long statement that read in part:" "The federal government on Sunday took on an intensified role in investigating the fatal police shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager, as Missouri officials defended their tough response to continuing protests and looting in this St. Louis suburb." "They were scared, they said. Fearful they would be attacked by rioters in their church, since Southminster Presbyterian sits right behind the suburban home of Wilson, the patrolman identified in the Aug. 9 shoot	black_sent.txt	1	50
53	  group based in Washington." "Malik Shabazz, national president of Black Lawyers for Justice, said he has been patrolling West Florissant Avenue each night, trying to keep the peace." "As the Missouri National Guard deploys to the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson, where protesters and police have clashed nightly since the shooting last week of an 	unarmed black teen by a white officer, the distinctions are less apparent." "Within hours of Michael Brown's death, a blanket of red rose petals and rows of lighted candles covered the ground where the black teenager had been shot, but the scene soon erupted into violence when local police rolled in after a trash bin 	black_sent.txt	1	51
54	 eadership,"" said Jamala Rogers, founder of Organization for Black Struggle, who lives five miles north of Ferguson." They patrol a community that is 67 percent black and 29 percent white. "President Barack Obama on Monday dispatched the attorney general to personally oversee the government's response to the fatal police shooting 10 days ago of an 	unarmed black teenager, the latest step in an extensive federal investigation that was expandin" "Behind the scenes, the administration worked to reassure some in the civil rights community that the nation's first black president sees the Ferguson crisis as an important moment." "Ferguson has been wracked by looting and violent mobs on and off sinc	black_sent.txt	1	52
55	  teenager, the latest step in an extensive federal investigation that was expandin" "Behind the scenes, the administration worked to reassure some in the civil rights community that the nation's first black president sees the Ferguson crisis as an important moment." "Ferguson has been wracked by looting and violent mobs on and off since an 	unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, was gunned down by a white patrol officer, Darren Wilson, on Aug. 9." Obama found that out the hard way when he made some off-hand comments critical of the arrest of black Harvard professor Henry Louis Gates in 2009 and - to a lesser extent - when he suggested his son would look like 	black_sent.txt	1	53
56	  hard way when he made some off-hand comments critical of the arrest of black Harvard professor Henry Louis Gates in 2009 and - to a lesser extent - when he suggested his son would look like Martin. "A grand jury has declined to indict Darren Wilson, the white Ferguson, Missury, police officer whose fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager sparked days of turbulant protests and a national conversation about race and police interactions with African" "A grand jury has declined to indict Darren Wilson, the white Ferguson, Missury, police officer whose fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager sparked days of turbulant protests and a national conversation about 	black_sent.txt	1	54
57	 ndict Darren Wilson, the white Ferguson, Missury, police officer whose fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager sparked days of turbulant protests and a national conversation about race and police interactions with African" "A grand jury has declined to indict Darren Wilson, the white Ferguson, Missury, police officer whose fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager sparked days of turbulant protests and a national conversation about race and police interactions with African" "Brown's shooting triggered a national debate about race, in part because it followed a string of incidents in which black men were killed under controversial circumstances." "A grand jury on Monday declined to indi	black_sent.txt	1	55
58	 t race and police interactions with African" "Brown's shooting triggered a national debate about race, in part because it followed a string of incidents in which black men were killed under controversial circumstances." "A grand jury on Monday declined to indict Darren Wilson, the white Ferguson, Missouri, police officer whose fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager sparked days of turbulant protests and a national conversation about race and police interactions with " "A grand jury on Monday declined to indict Darren Wilson, the white Ferguson, Missouri, police officer whose fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager sparked days of turbulant protests and a national conversation about 	black_sent.txt	1	56
59	 dict Darren Wilson, the white Ferguson, Missouri, police officer whose fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager sparked days of turbulant protests and a national conversation about race and police interactions with " "A grand jury on Monday declined to indict Darren Wilson, the white Ferguson, Missouri, police officer whose fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager sparked days of turbulant protests and a national conversation about race and police interactions with " "Brown's shooting triggered a national debate about race, in part because it followed a string of incidents in which black men were killed under controversial circumstances." "Three separate autopsies were conducted on Bro	black_sent.txt	1	57
60	  suburban riots, racial violence coming to the very place where many Americans — both white and black — had fled after the urban unrest of the 1960s." since the election of the nation’s first black president complaints among black residents in Ferguson Communities around the nation regularly take to the streets to protest police shootings of 	unarmed black men "Since then, a large and successful black middle class has emerged" "In a survey of St. Louis County residents a month after the initial violence, blacks and whites split over whether the shooting was justified (62 percent of whites said it was; 65 percent of black said it was not) and over whether Brown was 	black_sent.txt	1	58
61	  it difficult to support Giuliani's personal estimation of the rarity of deadly force by white police officers on black victims, but were limited by the unreliable data on homicides by police.""" "The incident, which occurred Saturday as the nation awaited a grand jury's decision on whether to indict the officer who killed an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Missouri in August, set the city of Cleveland on edge after days of modest street protes" "But the information about the gun possibly being a ""fake"" was not mentioned to the officers in a call to them about a young black male with a gun in a park. " "They determined quickly 	black_sent.txt	1	59
62	  them about a young black male with a gun in a park. " "They determined quickly after the shooting that Wilson shouldn't speak publicly - in contrast to George Zimmerman, a volunteer watchman who in 2012 shot black teenager Trayvon Martin - because it could only hurt his case. " That was before a white police officer shot an 	unarmed black teenager on a street this summer and months of daily protests transformed the unassuming city into a symbol. "Since August, activists from across the country descended as well to help shape a movement addressing the relationship between law enforcement and the black community." "In the same way, Michael Brown's name is being subsumed 	black_sent.txt	1	60
63	  residents in the middle-class suburb of 21,000 say they have realized how little they knew about the daily lives and struggles of some of their black neighbors." But how polite is a society in which any black mother at any time could become a Lesley McSpadden? "Darren Wilson, the white officer who fatally shot an 	unarmed black teenager in Missouri in August, is no longer a member of the Ferguson Police Department." "Eschewing a high-profile televised address or a speech in Ferguson, Missouri - which has been roiled by the killing of Michael Brown, an unarmed, black 18-year-old - Obama has focused on crafting a handful of policy initiatives and speaking 	black_sent.txt	1	61
64	 , a decision that prompted Attorney General E" "The decision struck many protesters as a chilling and frustrating repetition of events in Ferguson, Missouri, where a grand jury last month declined to indict the white officer who killed Michael Brown, a black 18-year-old man." "The country has been confronted with a series of images of 	unarmed black men who have died after encounters with police: video of Garner grappling with officers on a sidewalk, pictures of Brown's body lying in a street and surveillance footage of a black " "The country has been confronted with a series of images of unarmed black men who have died after encounters with police: video 	black_sent.txt	1	62
65	  country has been confronted with a series of images of unarmed black men who have died after encounters with police: video of Garner grappling with officers on a sidewalk, pictures of Brown's body lying in a street and surveillance footage of a black " "The country has been confronted with a series of images of 	unarmed black men who have died after encounters with police: video of Garner grappling with officers on a sidewalk, pictures of Brown's body lying in a street and surveillance footage of a black " "Activists in St. Louis - whose 115 days of protests have fueled the debate over policing in communities of color - have built ties with 	black_sent.txt	1	63
66	  black men in particular at risk when police stops escalate into deadly encounters." "A figure with such baggage, they say, might struggle to rebuild the public's trust in police - trust that seemed to shatter when grand jurors in Ferguson, Missouri, and New York City failed to indict police officers who used deadly force on 	unarmed black " "On Sunday, five St. Louis Rams players entered the field together during pre-game introductions with a ""Hands Up, Don't Shoot"" gesture meant to show solidarity with Michael Brown, the black teenager shot dead by a white police officer in August in the St." "There were Arthur Ashe and Billie Jean King in 	black_sent.txt	1	64
67	  why black residents of Ferguson may have already felt as if the police are an outside force that has been imposed upon them, rather than a group of public servants selected from the community to protect them from harm." We then have an incident that represents all of these problems in a concentrated form - an 	unarmed black man was killed by a (reportedly) white police officer who had stopped him as he was walking home. "Brown, a black 18-year-old, was fatally shot by Officer Darren Wilson last Saturday in Ferguson, Mo." "Dooley's spokeswoman, Pat Washington, said there have been long-standing concerns among many black leaders in the community 	black_sent.txt	1	65
68	  his father was killed in the line of duty when " "In July 2000, questions also were raised about his leading an investigation into two white police officers who fatally shot two black men." "Authorities in this restive suburb of St. Louis on Friday began telling their version of the events surrounding the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager by a white police officer, but the halting, contradictory nature of the account revived popular" "According to the documents, Ferguson police officers received a call at 11:51 a.m. Saturday about a robbery in progress at the store and were given the description of a suspect: a black male in a white T-shirt 	black_sent.txt	1	66
69	  the description of a suspect: a black male in a white T-shirt walking north toward a QuikTrip convenience s" The officer was also told that another black male was with the suspect. "Obama hit the links just four minutes after making his statement Thursday, calling for peace and restraint following the shooting of an 	unarmed black teen." It's legal to kill unarmed black men in America! """They gotta stop killing black people for nothing,"" he said" "The activists are already looking beyond Michael Brown , who they see as one name in a tragic roster of young black males killed by police, including 12-year-old Tamir Rice, fatally shot by 	black_sent.txt	1	67
70	  in a white T-shirt walking north toward a QuikTrip convenience s" The officer was also told that another black male was with the suspect. "Obama hit the links just four minutes after making his statement Thursday, calling for peace and restraint following the shooting of an unarmed black teen." It's legal to kill 	unarmed black men in America! """They gotta stop killing black people for nothing,"" he said" "The activists are already looking beyond Michael Brown , who they see as one name in a tragic roster of young black males killed by police, including 12-year-old Tamir Rice, fatally shot by officers Saturday in Cleveland while carrying a toy 	black_sent.txt	1	68
71	  stop killing black people for nothing,"" he said" "The activists are already looking beyond Michael Brown , who they see as one name in a tragic roster of young black males killed by police, including 12-year-old Tamir Rice, fatally shot by officers Saturday in Cleveland while carrying a toy gun." It's legal to kill 	unarmed black men in America! """They gotta stop killing black people for nothing,"" he said" "The activists are already looking beyond Michael Brown , who they see as one name in a tragic roster of young black males killed by police, including 12-year-old Tamir Rice, fatally shot by officers Saturday in Cleveland while carrying a toy 	black_sent.txt	1	69
72	 mental elements of childhood to black boys and girls. "Black childhood is considered innately inferior, dangerous and indistinguishable from black adulthood." "Black childhood is considered innately inferior, dangerous and indistinguishable from black adulthood." "Note officer Darren Wilson's description of his confrontation with Michael Brown, an 	unarmed black teenager, in Ferguson, Mo." "The official history of that night paints Wilson as an innocent white childwas so threatened by a big, black beast that his only option was to use lethal force." "Such descriptions, so similar to 19th-century defenses of lynching, are invoked each time a black child is gunned down in 	black_sent.txt	1	70
73	 .'s Missouri president, who walked near the head of the line. " "For nearly four months, we have heard powerful, young, nonviolent demonstrators cry out that black lives matter. ….""" "The moment that many feared the most -- the instant when the crowd learned that a grand jury declined to indict a white police officer for killing an 	unarmed black teenager in August -- had passed, angrily but uneventfully." "He was struck during his trip there by the stories of the police abusing suspects, disproportionately stopping black residents and using tickets in black neighborhoods as a way to raise money." "He was struck during his trip there by the stories of the police abusing suspec	black_sent.txt	1	71
74	  was killed in the United States by the police or armed vigilantes every 28 hours. "But this year, the parade had an edge: Pockets of protesters marched intermittently along the route, seeking to call attention to a grand jury's decision on Monday not to indict the police officer who shot and killed Michael Brown, an 	unarmed black teenag" The Missouri State Highway Patrol and the National Guard have had broad and costly protection roles here since a grand jury decided on Monday not to indict a white police officer in the death of an unarmed black teenager.  "The white police officer a grand jury declined to indict last week in the 	black_sent.txt	1	72
75	  decision on Monday not to indict the police officer who shot and killed Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenag" The Missouri State Highway Patrol and the National Guard have had broad and costly protection roles here since a grand jury decided on Monday not to indict a white police officer in the death of an 	unarmed black teenager.  "The white police officer a grand jury declined to indict last week in the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager has resigned from the this city's Police Department, his lawyer said on Saturday night." "ST. LOUIS -- At worship services around this region, clergy on Sunday called for recovery and healing after 	black_sent.txt	1	73
76	  State Highway Patrol and the National Guard have had broad and costly protection roles here since a grand jury decided on Monday not to indict a white police officer in the death of an unarmed black teenager.  "The white police officer a grand jury declined to indict last week in the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager has resigned from the this city's Police Department, his lawyer said on Saturday night." "ST. LOUIS -- At worship services around this region, clergy on Sunday called for recovery and healing after a week that began with an announcement that a grand jury would not indict a white police officer who shot an 	black_sent.txt	1	74
77	  black teenager has resigned from the this city's Police Department, his lawyer said on Saturday night." "ST. LOUIS -- At worship services around this region, clergy on Sunday called for recovery and healing after a week that began with an announcement that a grand jury would not indict a white police officer who shot an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson and" "I'm tired of living a certain way in our city,'' the Rev. Shaun Ellison Jones, the assistant pastor of Mount Zion Baptist Church-Christian Complex here, told the mostly black congregation in a simple room with tile floors. ''I'm tired of some unjust laws." "Chief Thomas Jackson said 	black_sent.txt	1	75
78	  laws." "Chief Thomas Jackson said he had no intention of resigning, and city officials cited plans to recruit more black police officers and give larger stipends to officers who live in the city. " "A Staten Island grand jury on Wednesday ended the criminal case against a white New York police officer whose chokehold on an 	unarmed black man led to the man's death, a decision that drew condemnation from elected officials and touched off a wave of prot" "The decision came barely a week after a grand jury found no criminality in the actions of another white police officer, Darren Wilson, who shot and killed Michael Brown, an unarmed 18-year-	black_sent.txt	1	76
79	 , speaking in Washington, said the decisions in New York and Missouri highlighted the frustrations that many African-Americans have harbored about a legal system that has a long history of discrimination against black people." "In August, some Washington players were the first in the N.F.L. to publicly protest the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager by a white police officer in Ferguson, Mo. " "In 2012, some high-profile N.B.A. players wore hoodies in the aftermath of the killing of another black teenager, Trayvon Martin. " "In protesting the actions of the police in Ferguson, the five Rams players tapped into concerns that go beyond the black community. " "Last 	black_sent.txt	1	77
80	 ,” Mr. de Blasio said at the new Police Academy in Queens." "“People need to know that black lives and brown lives matter as much as white lives,” Mr. de Blasio said at the new Police Academy in Queens." "In his first public interview this week, Darren Wilson, the white police officer who fatally shot an 	unarmed black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., was asked whether he could have done anything differently that would have prevented the killing." "In Ferguson, where the vast majority of police officers are white and most of the residents are black, many black residents have blamed aggressive policing for creating tensions." "In Ferguson, where the vast m	black_sent.txt	1	78
81	  vast majority of police officers are white and most of the residents are black, many black residents have blamed aggressive policing for creating tensions." "But under daylong snow showers, anger and frustration over a grand jury's decision on Monday not to indict a white police officer in the August killing of Michael Brown, an 	unarmed black teenager, remained palpable across the region." "The Thanksgiving Day Parade in St. Louis was postponed because of the unrest, and some people were urging a boycott of the traditional Black Friday shopping as a protest against inequalities in the justice system." "Instead, the White House tried to channel the rage over the fatal polic	black_sent.txt	1	79
82	  as a protest against inequalities in the justice system." "Instead, the White House tried to channel the rage over the fatal police shooting of a black teenager there into a national debate about how to restore trust between the police and the public." "Less than three weeks later, a white police officer fatally shot an 	unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, in Ferguson, Mo." "On Thursday, he outlined a series of planned changes in police training, a day after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict a white police officer who in July performed a chokehold on Mr. Garner, an unarmed black man who died after the confrontatio" "On the heels 	black_sent.txt	1	80
83	  three weeks later, a white police officer fatally shot an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, in Ferguson, Mo." "On Thursday, he outlined a series of planned changes in police training, a day after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict a white police officer who in July performed a chokehold on Mr. Garner, an 	unarmed black man who died after the confrontatio" "On the heels of the protests in Ferguson, where another white officer was cleared by a grand jury after a fatal encounter with an unarmed black man, community leaders in New York and elsewhere have professed a flagging faith in the justice system." "Mr. Williams has also been 	black_sent.txt	1	81
84	  after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict a white police officer who in July performed a chokehold on Mr. Garner, an unarmed black man who died after the confrontatio" "On the heels of the protests in Ferguson, where another white officer was cleared by a grand jury after a fatal encounter with an 	unarmed black man, community leaders in New York and elsewhere have professed a flagging faith in the justice system." "Mr. Williams has also been critical of the police over the death last month of Akai Gurley, an unarmed black man shot by an officer patrolling a public housing staircase in Brooklyn with his gun drawn." "Mr. 	black_sent.txt	1	82
85	  in Ferguson, where another white officer was cleared by a grand jury after a fatal encounter with an unarmed black man, community leaders in New York and elsewhere have professed a flagging faith in the justice system." "Mr. Williams has also been critical of the police over the death last month of Akai Gurley, an 	unarmed black man shot by an officer patrolling a public housing staircase in Brooklyn with his gun drawn." "Mr. Williams, as well as civil rights leaders, have tied that shooting to Mr. Garner’s death as twin examples of a disregard for the lives of black men." "As National Guard troops began withdrawing from this troubled 	black_sent.txt	1	83
86	 ." "Mr. Williams, as well as civil rights leaders, have tied that shooting to Mr. Garner’s death as twin examples of a disregard for the lives of black men." "As National Guard troops began withdrawing from this troubled region, police officials said on Tuesday that they were investigating whether the stepfather of Michael Brown, the 	unarmed black teenager fatally shot by a white police officer in August, incit" "When I walk down the street, they don't see my SAT score, they see a black man." I now realize that we who consider ourselves leaders in the black community can't just be against racism. "We have to also be against 	black_sent.txt	1	84
87	 , Michael Eric Dyson, a black Georgetown University professor, ""why don't you cut it down so so many white police officers don't have to be in black areas?" "And in the winter of 2000, just as Mr. Giuliani was gearing up his candidacy for the United States Senate, an undercover officer shot and killed an 	unarmed black security guard named Patrick Dorismond after a brief struggle in Midtown; the victim had been"  ''I think of black people or Hispanic people.'' "Paul McLemore, the first African-American to become a New Jersey state trooper, was on the streets of Newark in 1967 when riots following a police beating of a black taxi driver 	black_sent.txt	1	85
88	  pastor and black police officer in Flint, Mich., said he was conflicted by the grand jury's decision, but concluded that it was correct." Then she looked at her black friend. "The St. Louis County grand jury's decision not to indict the white police officer who in August shot and killed Michael Brown, an 	unarmed black teenager, would have generated widespread anger and disappointment in any case." "For the black community of Ferguson, the killing of Michael Brown was the last straw in a long train of abuses that they have suffered daily at the hands of the local police." "The case resonated across the country -- in New York City, 	black_sent.txt	1	86
89	  far greater risk -- 21 times greater -- of being shot dead by police than young white men." "These statistics reflect the fact that many police officers see black men as expenda ble figures on the urban landscape, not quite human beings." "The reaction to the failure of the grand jury to indict in the shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, by a white police officer, Darren Wilson, touched something deep and ancient and anguished in the black community." "The reaction to the failure of the grand jury to indict in the shooting of an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, by a white police officer, Darren Wilson, touched something deep and ancient 	black_sent.txt	1	87
90	 ." "The reaction to the failure of the grand jury to indict in the shooting of an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, by a white police officer, Darren Wilson, touched something deep and ancient and anguished in the black community." "The reaction to the failure of the grand jury to indict in the shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, by a white police officer, Darren Wilson, touched something deep and ancient and anguished in the black community." An October analysis by ProPublica of police shootings from 2010 to 2012 found that young black males are 21 times more likely to be shot dead by police officers than their white counterparts. "On	black_sent.txt	1	88
91	 d killed Derek Walker, 26, a black man who was publicly brandishing a gun, apparently intending to use it on himself after losing a custody fight." "At colleges and high schools, outside police stations, courthouses, city halls and federal buildings, a series of nationwide protests on Monday maintained the momentum of those seeking justice for the 	unarmed black teenager who was killed by a white polic" "Just up the road from the memorial of stuffed animals and candles that has become a place of pilgrimage and protest over the shooting death of Michael Brown, there is an empty parking lot where another young black man was killed last week on the night 	black_sent.txt	1	89
92	  of Black Women Attorneys luncheon." "Speaking to the Black Law Students Association at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law in Manhattan in early 2001, she described the importance of allaying those fears through closer ties with law enforcement." "Mr. Garner's death in July was followed three weeks later by the fatal shooting of an 	unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, in Ferguson, by a white police officer, Darren Wilson." "The argument is that this is not a perfect case, because Brown -- and, one would assume, now Garner -- isn't a perfect victim and the protesters haven't all been perfectly civil, so therefore any movement to counter black oppression that flows 	black_sent.txt	1	90
93	 , black men, supported by the people who understand their plight and feel their pain, are saying to the police culture of America, ''We can't breathe!''" "The Cleveland report was released a day after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict a white New York City police officer in the choking death of an 	unarmed black man, Eric Garner, 43, and nearly two weeks after a grand jury in Missouri decided not" "The Cleveland report was released a day after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict a white New York City police officer in the choking death of an unarmed black man, Eric Garner, 43, and nearly two weeks after 	black_sent.txt	1	91
94	  City police officer in the choking death of an unarmed black man, Eric Garner, 43, and nearly two weeks after a grand jury in Missouri decided not" "The Cleveland report was released a day after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict a white New York City police officer in the choking death of an 	unarmed black man, Eric Garner, 43, and nearly two weeks after a grand jury in Missouri decided not" And a grand jury in South Carolina returned a murder indictment this week against a former police chief of Eutawville in the 2011 killing of an unarmed black man he was trying to arrest. "While Cleveland is 53 percent black and 37 	black_sent.txt	1	92
95	  a white New York City police officer in the choking death of an unarmed black man, Eric Garner, 43, and nearly two weeks after a grand jury in Missouri decided not" And a grand jury in South Carolina returned a murder indictment this week against a former police chief of Eutawville in the 2011 killing of an 	unarmed black man he was trying to arrest. "While Cleveland is 53 percent black and 37 percent white, its 1,551-person police department is almost the reverse image: 25 percent black and 65 percent white, the latest data shows." "While Cleveland is 53 percent black and 37 percent white, its 1,551-person police department is almost the reverse image	black_sent.txt	1	93
96	  an officer within two seconds after arriving in a patrol car." "The Justice Department began investigating the Cleveland police in March 2013, after the mayor, Frank G. Jackson, a Democrat, asked for an outside review of the city's policing policies following the 2012 killing of two black people who were apparently un" "The death of an 	unarmed black man from a police chokehold in New York scrambled the politics of race and law enforcement on Thursday as some conservatives who stood by the police in Ferguson, Mo., condemned them on Staten Island." "Several Republican political figures and conservative commentators drew a distinction from the tumultuous events in Ferguson, where a 	black_sent.txt	1	94
97	 ork scrambled the politics of race and law enforcement on Thursday as some conservatives who stood by the police in Ferguson, Mo., condemned them on Staten Island." "Several Republican political figures and conservative commentators drew a distinction from the tumultuous events in Ferguson, where a police officer was not indicted after shooting an 	unarmed black 18-year-old to death." 	black_sent.txt	1	95
