As Guard Begins Pullout, Stepfather of Ferguson Victim Is Under Investigation

FERGUSON, Mo. -- As National Guard troops began withdrawing from this troubled region, police officials said on Tuesday that they were investigating whether the stepfather of Michael Brown, the unarmed black teenager fatally shot by a white police officer in August, incited a riot by issuing an invective-filled call to action outside the police department Nov. 24, not long before protesters began smashing windows and burning cars.

The angry outburst by the stepfather, Louis Head, occurred just after the announcement that a grand jury decided not to indict the officer, Darren Wilson, in Mr. Brown's death. St. Louis County Police officials said they were investigating Mr. Head's comments as part of a broader probe into the widespread violence following the grand jury's decision.

"The investigation includes multiple arsons, robberies, destruction of properties and larcenies," Officer Shawn McGuire, a department spokesman, said in an email. "The statements made by Louis Head are also under investigation. When the investigation is completed, our department will forward everything to the St. Louis County prosecuting attorney's office."

Mr. Head, reached by phone Tuesday, said he had not heard from the police about an investigation. "I'm not worried about nothing," said Mr. Head, who declined to discuss the comments he made last week.

After a stretch of days with no violent protests, Gov. Jay Nixon announced on Tuesday that the Missouri National Guard would wind down its operations in the region. Mr. Nixon gave no firm timetable for the withdrawal, saying only that there would be a "systematic reduction" of the Guard, which has been stationed at hospitals, shopping malls, utility substations, police and fire stations. As of Tuesday afternoon, 1,268 Guard troops were in the area, the governor said.

Although Thomas Jackson, the Ferguson police chief, told Fox News on Monday that the authorities were "pursuing" Mr. Head's statements, it remained unclear whether the people who started fires, broke windows or looted stores had been influenced by his remarks -- or had even heard them.

On Nov. 24, shortly before 8:30 p.m., as hundreds of protesters who were assembled outside the police station here learned Officer Wilson was not being charged, Mr. Head embraced Mr. Brown's mother, Lesley McSpadden, on the hood of a car. Protesters had been listening to the announcement on loudspeakers and car stereos, and the family's reaction was videotaped and published by The New York Times. Mr. Head turned to the crowd, stomped on the hood and shouted, repeatedly, "Burn this bitch down!"

While making his outburst, Mr. Head asked for a microphone, but he was not handed one, and it seems most likely that many in the crowd, spread throughout a four-lane street and adjacent parking lots, had no idea that he had spoken.

State Senator Jamilah Nasheed, a St. Louis Democrat who has supported peaceful protesters, said she feared an investigation into Mr. Head's comments would make it harder for the community to move forward. "It's just really unfortunate because we're trying to heal, and I feel like that's only putting more fuel to the fire," said Ms. Nasheed, who said she did not believe Mr. Head caused the rioting.

Also Tuesday, some activists from the St. Louis area and other parts of the country who met with President Obama at the White House on Monday expressed dissatisfaction about the limited scope of the initiatives the president announced to improve policing, including tightening standards on the provision of military-style equipment to local police departments.

"I come from north St. Louis, and I'm sitting here in Washington, D.C., with my friends that just saw the president," said Kareem Jackson, a rap artist and community activist whose stage name is Tef Poe, and who was not at the meeting with Mr. Obama. "If not for anything else, for me, that's admirable. What comes from that? I don't know. I don't expect much from the same system that has its foot on our throat."

In the Seattle area, a 46-year-old man was arrested on Tuesday, accused of making repeated threats to kill Officer Wilson and other officers on his Facebook page. The man, Jaleel Tariq Abdul-Jabbaar of Kirkland, Wash., was charged with three counts of making interstate threats, according to federal prosecutors. 
