Governor Seeks Way to Reinforce Budget to Cover Costs in Ferguson

FERGUSON, Mo. -- Gov. Jay Nixon said on Friday evening that he was calling a special legislative session to find a way to pay for mounting state costs for handling the unrest that has gripped this city.

Money set aside for such emergencies will soon run out, Governor Nixon said in a news release. In private talks with Missouri legislative leaders on Friday, Mr. Nixon said more money needed to be set aside rapidly to ensure that members of the National Guard, called here this month, are paid on Dec. 15.

The Missouri State Highway Patrol and the National Guard have had broad and costly protection roles here since a grand jury decided on Monday not to indict a white police officer in the death of an unarmed black teenager. Looting, arsons and chaos followed, and Mr. Nixon on Tuesday increased the number of Guard members in the neighborhoods here, and the police made their presence far more pronounced.

Mr. Nixon's office has not provided an estimate so far on the cost of the crisis. The approved state budget for the fiscal year that ends next June includes $4 million for the emergency response costs of the Guard and another $3.4 million for the State Emergency Management Agency for disaster expenses in agencies like the highway patrol. No date was set yet for the special session.

"Time is of the essence," said Mr. Nixon, who is a Democrat in a state where both chambers of the legislature are dominated by Republicans. "It is vital that we act quickly so that we can fulfill our obligation to the men and women who are so bravely and capably serving their fellow citizens."

Here in Ferguson on Friday, a key thoroughfare -- West Florissant Avenue, the scene of much of the destruction on Monday night -- reopened, though some businesses were cordoned off with yellow police tape, and state troopers kept watch. The shift was not permanent: The police announced that the road would be shut down between 5 p.m. and 7 a.m. "until further notice."

And late Friday, scores of protesters marched and shouted along South Florissant Road, blocking traffic several times.

The police told them to leave the road; the protesters at first complied, but many returned. Officers made 15 arrests.

Elected officials and business owners searched for a path forward, especially in Dellwood, a neighboring city of about 5,000 people that reported the destruction of more than 10 percent of its commercial district in Monday's chaos.

"What you see down this corridor is jobs that have left in this season, when folks that do not have means for transportation all the time work locally," said State Senator Gina Walsh. "They live locally, and they walk here. This corridor was their livelihood."

Mr. Nixon, a subject of near-constant criticism for his handling of the Ferguson protests, on Friday tried to direct attention toward a state relief program, announced after the first round of disorder in August, that provides loans to small businesses.

The program, which initially had a budget of $1 million, has about $625,000 available to disburse, the governor's office said.

But on a day when Mr. Nixon tried to promote his administration's efforts, disparagement still abounded here. The Dellwood mayor, speaking not far from a business's sign that labeled Mr. Nixon's strategy an "epic fail," said in the afternoon that he had not spoken with the governor since the events of Monday night.

"It's not a great message," said the mayor, Reggie Jones. "I reached out to the office on Tuesday. I did talk to some of his assistants. I did request to meet with the governor, and I was told his schedule's a little tight. But I have not heard from the governor since then."

Mr. Nixon's office did not respond to a request for comment. 
